




Robert ouis Stevenson, A Record, An stimate, A Memorial



by A. H. app 







RAC







A  words may here be allowed me to explain one or two points.  

irst, about the facsimile of last page of reface to AMIIAR 

STDIS  M AD S.  Stevenson was in Davos when the greater 

portion of that wor went through the press.  He felt so much the 

disadvantage of being there in the circumstances (both himself and 

his wife ill) that he begged me to read the proofs of the reface 

for him.  This illness has record in the letter from him (pp. 2-

29).  The printers, of course, had directions to send the copy and 

proofs of the reface to me.  Hence I am able now to give this 

facsimile.



ith regard to the letter at p. 19, of which facsimile is also 

given, what Stevenson there meant is not the "three last" of that 

batch, but the three last sent to me before - though that was an 

error on his part - he only then sent two chapters, maing the 

"eleven chapters now" - sent to me by post.



Another point on which I might have dwelt and illustrated by many 

instances is this, that though Stevenson was fond of hob-nobbing 

with all sorts and conditions of men, this desire of wide contact 

and intercourse has little show in his novels - the ordinary fibre 

of commonplace human beings not receiving much celebration from him 

there another case in which his private bent and sympathies 

received little illustration in his novels.  ut the fact lies 

implicit in much I have written.



I have to than many authors for permission to quote extracts I 

have used.



AADR H. A.







 CTTS



I.      ITRDCTI AD IRST IMRSSIS

II.     TRASR ISAD AD SM RMIISCCS

III.    TH CHID ATHR  TH MA

I.     HRDIT ISTRATD

.      TRAS

I.     SM ARIR TTRS

II.    TH AIIMA TTRS

III.   R  ATR ARS

I.     SM CHARACTRISTICS

.      A SAMA MMRIA  R. . STS

I.     MISS STS' RCRD  A IRIMA

II.    HIS IS AD MTHDS

III.   RACHR AD MSTIC AIST

I.    STS AS DRAMATIST

.     THR  D AD I

I.    STS'S M

II.   RS  RTH

III.  ARIR DTRMIATIS AD RSTS

I.    MR DMD CARC STDMA'S STIMAT

.     TISTIC MT AD ITS CTS

I.    IT I STS'S STRIS

II.   RSA CHRSS AD ITD M

III.  DIRH RIRS' DICTA IAICA T ATR R

I.   MR H'S SIT RRSIS

.    MR CHRISTI MRRA'S IMRSSIS

I.   HR-IAIS

II.  MR . MR, MR MARRITT ATS, AD THRS

III. CTD CMIATIS

I.     AADS

.    RD RSR'S CAS

I.   MR SS AD MS.  TRASR ISAD

II.  STS RTRAITS

III. ASS AD RRRS I CRITICISM

I.  TTRS AD MS I TSTIM

ADI







RRT IS STS









CHATR I - ITRDCTI AD IRST IMRSSIS







M little effort to mae Thoreau better nown in ngland had one 

result that I am pleased to thin of.  It brought me into personal 

association with R. . Stevenson, who had written and published in 

TH CRHI MAAI an essay on Thoreau, in whom he had for some 

time taen an interest.  He found in Thoreau not only a rare 

character for originality, courage, and indefatigable independence, 

but also a master of style, to whom, on this account, as much as 

any, he was inclined to play the part of the "sedulous ape," as he 

had acnowledged doing to many others - a later exercise, perhaps 

in some ways as fruitful as any that had gone before.  A recent 

poet, having had some seeds of plants sent to him from orthern 

Scotland to the South, celebrated his setting of them beside those 

native to the Surrey slope on which he dwelt, with the lines -





"And when the orthern seeds are growing,

Another beauty then bestowing,

e shall be fine, and orth to South

e giving isses, mouth to mouth."





So the Thoreau influence on Stevenson was as if a tart American 

wild-apple had been grafted on an nglish pippin, and produced a 

wholly new ind with the flavours of both and here wild America 

and ngland issed each other mouth to mouth.



The direct result was the essay in TH CRHI, but the indirect 

results were many and less easily assessed, as Stevenson himself, 

as we shall see, was ever ready to admit.  The essay on Thoreau was 

written in America, which further, perhaps, bears out my point.



ne of the authorities, quoted by Mr Hammerton, in STSIAA 

says of the circumstances in which he found our author, when he was 

busily engaged on that bit of wor





"I have visited him in a lonely lodging in California, it was 

previous to his happy marriage, and found him submerged in billows 

of bed-clothes about him floated the scattered volumes of a 

complete set of Thoreau he was preparing an essay on that worthy, 

and he looed at the moment lie a half-drowned man, yet he was not 

cast down.  His wor, an endless tas, was better than a straw to 

him.  It was to become his life-preserver and to prolong his years.  

I feel convinced that without it he must have surrendered long 

since.  I found Stevenson a man of the frailest physique, though 

most unaccountably tenacious of life a man whose pen was 

indefatigable, whose brain was never at rest, who, as far as I am 

able to udge, looed upon everybody and everything from a 

supremely intellectual point of view."  (1)



e remember the common belief in orshire and other parts that a 

man could not die so long as he could stand up - a belief on which 

poor ranwell ronte was fain to act and to illustrate, but R. . 

Stevenson illustrated it, as this writer shows, in a better, 

calmer, and healthier way, despite his lac of health.



n some little points of fact, however, Stevenson was wrong and I 

wrote to the ditor of TH SCTATR a letter, titled, I thin, 

"Thoreau's ity and Humour," which he inserted.  This brought me a 

private letter from Stevenson, who expressed the wish to see me, 

and have some tal with me on that and other matters.  To this 

letter I at once replied, directing to 1 Heriot Row, dinburgh, 

saying that, as I was soon to be in that City, it might be possible 

for me to see him there.  In reply to this letter Mr Stevenson 

wrote





"TH CTTA, CASTT  RAMAR,

SDA, AST ( TH), 11.





"M DAR SIR, - I should long ago have written to than you for 

your ind and fran letter but, in my state of health, papers are 

apt to get mislaid, and your letter has been vainly hunted for 

until this (Sunday) morning.



"I must first say a word as to not quoting your boo by name.  It 

was the consciousness that we disagreed which led me, I daresay, 

wrongly, to suppress A references throughout the paper.  ut you 

may be certain a proper reference will now be introduced.



"I regret I shall not be able to see you in dinburgh  one visit 

to dinburgh has already cost me too dear in that invaluable 

particular, health but if it should be at all possible for you to 

pass by raemar, I believe you would find an attentive listener, 

and I can offer you a bed, a drive, and necessary food.



"If, however, you should not be able to come thus far, I can 

promise two things.  irst, I shall religiously revise what I have 

written, and bring out more clearly the point of view from which I 

regarded Thoreau.  Second, I shall in the preface record your 

obection.



"The point of view (and I must as you not to forget that any such 

short paper is essentially only a SCTI THRH a man) was this  

I desired to loo at the man through his boos.  Thus, for 

instance, when I mentioned his return to the pencil-maing, I did 

it only in passing (perhaps I was wrong), because it seemed to me 

not an illustration of his principles, but a brave departure from 

them.  Thousands of such there were I do not doubt still they 

might be hardly to my purpose though, as you say so, I suppose 

some of them would be.



"ur difference as to 'pity,' I suspect, was a logomachy of my 

maing.  o pitiful acts, on his part, would surprise me  I now 

he would be more pitiful in practice than most of the whiners but 

the spirit of that practice would still seem to me to be unustly 

described by the word pity.



"hen I try to be measured, I find myself usually suspected of a 

sneaing unindness for my subect, but you may be sure, sir, I 

would give up most other things to be as good a man as Thoreau.  

ven my nowledge of him leads me thus far.



"Should you find yourself able to push on so far - it may even lie 

on your way - believe me your visit will be very welcome.  The 

weather is cruel, but the place is, as I daresay you now, the very 

A of Scotland - bar Tummelside. - ours very sincerely,



RRT IS STS."





Some delay too place in my leaving ondon for Scotland, and hence 

what seemed a hitch.  I wrote mentioning the reason of my delay, 

and expressing the fear that I might have to forego the prospect of 

seeing him in raemar, as his circumstances might have altered in 

the meantime.  In answer came this note, lie so many, if not most 

of his, indeed, without date-





TH CTTA, CASTT  RAMAR. ( DAT.)



"M DAR SIR, - I am here as yet a fixture, and beg you to come our 

way.  ould Tuesday or ednesday suit you by any chance  e shall 

then, I believe, be empty  a thing favourable to tals.  ou get 

here in time for dinner.  I stay till near the end of September, 

unless, as may very well be, the weather drive me forth. - ours 

very sincerely, RRT IS STS."





I accordingly went to raemar, where he and his wife and her son 

were staying with his father and mother.



These were red-letter days in my calendar alie on account of 

pleasant intercourse with his honoured father and himself.  Here is 

my pen-and-in portrait of R. . Stevenson, thrown down at the 

time



Mr Stevenson's is, indeed, a very picturesque and striing figure.  

ot so tall probably as he seems at first sight from his extreme 

thinness, but the pose and air could not be otherwise described 

than as distinguished.  Head of fine type, carried well on the 

shoulders and in waling with the impression of being a little 

thrown bac long brown hair, falling from under a broadish-brimmed 

Spanish form of soft felt hat, Rembrandtesque loose ind of 

Inverness cape when waling, and invariable velvet acet inside 

the house.  ou would say at first sight, wherever you saw him, 

that he was a man of intellect, artistic and individual, wholly out 

of the common.  His face is sensitive, full of expression, though 

it could not be called strictly beautiful.  It is longish, 

especially seen in profile, and features a little irregular the 

brow at once high and broad.  A hint of vagary, and ust a hint in 

the expression, is qualified by the eyes, which are set rather far 

apart from each other as seems, and with a most wistful, and at the 

same time possibly a merry impish expression arising over that, yet 

fran and clear, piercing, but at the same time steady, and fall on 

you with a gentle radiance and animation as he speas.  Romance, if 

with an indescribable SC of whimsicality, is mared upon him 

sometimes he has the loo as of the Ancient Mariner, and could fix 

you with his glittering e'e, and he would, as he points his 

sentences with a movement of his thin white forefinger, when this 

is not monopolised with the almost incessant cigarette.  There is a 

faint suggestion of a hair-brained sentimental trace on his 

countenance, but controlled, after all, by good Scotch sense and 

shrewdness.  In conversation he is very animated, and lies to as 

questions.  A favourite and characteristic attitude with him was to 

put his foot on a chair or stool and rest his elbow on his nee, 

with his chin on his hand or to sit, or rather to half sit, half 

lean, on the corner of a table or des, one of his legs swinging 

freely, and when anything that ticled him was said he would laugh 

in the heartiest manner, even at the ris of bringing on his cough, 

which at that time was troublesome.  ften when he got animated he 

rose and waled about as he spoe, as if movement aided thought and 

expression.  Though he loved dinburgh, which was full of 

associations for him, he had no good word for its east winds, which 

to him were as death.  et he passed one winter as a "Silverado 

squatter," the story of which he has inimitably told in the volume 

titled TH SIRAD SATTRS and he afterwards spent several 

winters at Davos lat, where, as he said to me, he not only 

breathed good air, but learned to now with closest intimacy ohn 

Addington Symonds, who "though his boos were good, was far finer 

and more interesting than any of his boos."  He needed a good deal 

of nursery attentions, but his invalidism was never obtrusively 

brought before one in any sympathy-seeing way by himself on the 

contrary, a very manly, self-sustaining spirit was evident and the 

amount of wor which he managed to turn out even when at his worst 

was truly surprising.



His wife, an American lady, is highly cultured, and is herself an 

author.  In her speech there is ust the slightest suggestion of 

the American accent, which only made it the more pleasing to my 

ear.  She is heart and soul devoted to her husband, proud of his 

achievements, and her delight is the consciousness of substantially 

aiding him in his enterprises.



They then had with them a boy of eleven or twelve, Samuel loyd 

sbourne, to be much referred to later (a son of Mrs Stevenson by a 

former marriage), whose delight was to draw the oddest, but perhaps 

half intentional or unintentional caricatures, funny, in some 

cases, beyond expression.  His room was designated the picture-

gallery, and on entering I could scarce refrain from bursting into 

laughter, even at the general effect, and, noticing this, and that 

I was putting some restraint on myself out of respect for the 

host's feelings, Stevenson said to me with a sly win and a gentle 

dig in the ribs, "It's laugh and be thanful here."  n loyd's 

account simple engraving materials, types, and a small printing-

press had been procured and it was Stevenson's delight to mae 

funny poems, stories, and morals for the engravings executed, and 

all would be duly printed together.  Stevenson's thorough enoyment 

of the picture-gallery, and his goodness to loyd, becoming himself 

a very boy for the nonce, were delightful to witness and in degree 

to share.  herever they were - at raemar, in dinburgh, at Davos 

lat, or even at Silverado - the engraving and printing went on.  

The mention of the picture-gallery suggests that it was out of his 

interest in the colour-drawing and the picture-gallery that his 

first published story, TRASR ISAD, grew, as we shall see.



I have some copies of the rude printing-press productions, 

inexpressibly quaint, grotesque, a ind of literary horse-play, yet 

with a certain squint-eyed, sprawling genius in it, and innocent 

childish Rabelaisian mirth of a sort.  At all events I cannot loo 

at the slight memorials of that time, which I still possess, 

without laughing afresh till my eyes are dewy.  Stevenson, as I 

understood, began TRASR ISAD more to entertain loyd sbourne 

than anything else the chapters being regularly read to the family 

circle as they were written, and with scarcely a purpose beyond.  

The lad became Stevenson's trusted companion and collaborator - 

clearly with a touch of genius.



I have before me as I write some of these funny momentoes of that 

time, carefully ept, often looed at.  ne of them is, "TH AC 

CA R, ID ADTRS I TH AR ST  a Tale of Instruction 

and Amusement for the oung, by Samuel . sbourne, printed by the 

author Davos lat," with the most remarable cuts.  It would not 

do some of the sensationalists anything but good to read it even at 

this day, since many points in their art are absurdly caricatured.  

Another is "MRA MMS A CCTI  CTS AD RSS, by R. 

. Stevenson, author of the  SCAR, etc., etc.  rinters, S. 

. sbourne and Company, Davos lat."  Here are the lines to a 

rare piece of grotesque, titled A A I DARI -





'road-gaing on untrodden lands,

See where adventurous Corte stands,

hile in the heavens above his head,

The eagle sees its daily bread.

How aptly fact to fact replies,

Heroes and eagles, hills and sies.

e, who contemn the fatted slave,

oo on this emblem and be brave."





Another, TH HAT, has these lines -





"See in the print how, moved by whim,

Trumpeting umbo, great and grim,

Adusts his trun, lie a cravat,

To noose that individual's hat

The Sacred Ibis in the distance, 

oys to observe his bold resistance."





R. . Stevenson wrote from Davos lat, in sending me TH AC 

CA





"Sam sends as a present a wor of his own.  I hope you feel 

flattered, for THIS IS SIM TH IRST TIM H HAS R I  

AA.  I have to buy my own wors, I can tell you."





ater he said, in sending a second





"I own I have delayed this letter till I could forward the 

enclosed.  Remembering the night at raemar, when we visited the 

picture-gallery, I hope it may amuse you  you see we do some 

publishing hereaway."





Delightfully suggestive and highly enoyable, too, were the 

meetings in the little drawing-room after dinner, when the 

contrasted traits of father and son came into full play - when R. 

. Stevenson would sometimes draw out a new view by bold, half-

paradoxical assertion, or compel advance on the point from a new 

quarter by a searching question couched in the simplest language, 

or reveal his own latest conviction finally, by a few sentences as 

nicely rounded off as though they had been written, while he rose 

and gently moved about, as his habit was, in the course of those 

more extended remars.  Then a chapter or two of TH SA-C would 

be read, with due pronouncement on the main points by one or other 

of the family audience.



The reading of the boo is one thing.  It was quite another thing 

to hear Stevenson as he stood reading it aloud, with his hand 

stretched out holding the manuscript, and his body gently swaying 

as a ind of rhythmical commentary on the story.  His fine voice, 

clear and een it some of its tones, had a wonderful power of 

inflection and variation, and when he came to stand in the place of 

Silver you could almost have imagined you saw the great one-legged 

ohn Silver, oyous-eyed, on the rolling sea.  es, to read it in 

print was good, but better yet to hear Stevenson read it.







CHATR II - TRASR ISAD AD SM RMIISCCS







H I left raemar, I carried with me a considerable portion of 

the MS. of TRASR ISAD, with an outline of the rest of the 

story.  It originally bore the odd title of TH SA-C, and, as I 

have told before, I showed it to Mr Henderson, the proprietor of 

the  S' AR, who came to an arrangement with Mr 

Stevenson, and the story duly appeared in its pages, as well as the 

two which succeeded it.



Stevenson himself in his article in TH IDR for August 194 

(reprinted in M IRST  volume and in a late volume of the 

DIRH DITI) has recalled some of the circumstances connected 

with this visit of mine to raemar, as it bore on the destination 

of TRASR ISAD





"And now, who should come dropping in,  MACHIA, but Dr app, 

lie the disguised prince, who is to bring down the curtain upon 

peace and happiness in the last act for he carried in his pocet, 

not a horn or a talisman, but a publisher, in fact, ready to 

unearth new writers for my old friend Mr Henderson's  S.  

ven the ruthlessness of a united family recoiled before the 

extreme measure of inflicting on our guest the mutilated members of 

TH SA-C at the same time, we would by no means stop our 

readings, and accordingly the tale was begun again at the 

beginning, and solemnly redelivered for the benefit of Dr app.  

rom that moment on, I have thought highly of his critical faculty 

for when he left us, he carried away the manuscript in his 

portmanteau.



"TRASR ISAD - it was Mr Henderson who deleted the first title, 

TH SA-C - appeared duly in  S, where it figured in 

the ignoble midst without woodcuts, and attracted not the least 

attention.  I did not care.  I lied the tale myself, for much the 

same reason as my father lied the beginning  it was my ind of 

picturesque.  I was not a little proud of ohn Silver also and to 

this day rather admire that smooth and formidable adventurer.  hat 

was infinitely more exhilarating, I had passed a landmar.  I had 

finished a tale and written The nd upon my manuscript, as I had 

not done since TH TAD RISI, when I was a boy of sixteen, 

not yet at college.  In truth, it was so by a lucy set of 

accidents  had not Dr app come on his visit, had not the tale 

flowed from me with singular ease, it must have been laid aside, 

lie its predecessors, and found a circuitous and unlamented way to 

the fire.  urists may suggest it would have been better so.  I am 

not of that mind.  The tale seems to have given much pleasure, and 

it brought (or was the means of bringing) fire, food, and wine to a 

deserving family in which I too an interest.  I need scarcely say 

I mean my own."





He himself gives a goodly list of the predecessors which had found 

a circuitous and unlamented way to the fire





"As soon as I was able to write, I became a good friend to the 

paper-maers.  Reams upon reams must have gone to the maing of 

RATHIT, TH TAD RISI, TH I'S ARD (otherwise AR 

HITHAD), DARD DA, A CTR DAC, and A DTTA I TH 

ST.  RATHIT was attempted before fifteen, TH DTTA at 

twenty-nine, and the succession of defeats lasted unbroen till I 

was thirty-one."





Another thing I carried from raemar with me which I greatly prie 

- this was a copy of CHRISTIAIT CIRMD  ISH AD HATH 

TSTIM, by Mr Stevenson's father, with his autograph signature 

and many of his own marginal notes.  He had thought deeply on many 

subects - theological, scientific, and social - and had recorded, 

I am afraid, but the smaller half of his thoughts and speculations.  

Several days in the mornings, before R. . Stevenson was able to 

face the somewhat "snell" air of the hills, I had long wals with 

the old gentleman, when we also had long tals on many subects - 

the liberalising of the Scottish Church, educational reform, etc. 

and, on one occasion, a statement of his reason, because of the 

subscription, for never having become an elder.  That he had in 

some small measure enoyed my society, as I certainly had much 

enoyed his, was borne out by a letter which I received from the 

son in reply to one I had written, saying that surely his father 

had never meant to present me at the last moment on my leaving by 

coach with that volume, with his name on it, and with pencilled 

notes here and there, but had merely given it me to read and 

return.  In the circumstances I may perhaps be excused quoting from 

a letter dated Castleton of raemar, September 11, in 

illustration of what I have said -





"M DAR DR A, - My father has gone, but I thin I may tae it 

upon me to as you to eep the boo.  f all things you could do to 

endear yourself to me you have done the best, for, from your 

letter, you have taen a fancy to my father.



"I do not now how to than you for your ind trouble in the matter 

of TH SA-C, but I am not unmindful.  My health is still 

poorly, and I have added intercostal rheumatism - a new attraction, 

which sewed me up nearly double for two days, and still gives me 'a 

list to starboard' - let us be ever nautical. . . . I do not thin 

with the start I have, there will be any difficulty in letting Mr 

Henderson go ahead whenever he lies.  I will write my story up to 

its legitimate conclusion, and then we shall be in a position to 

udge whether a sequel would be desirable, and I myself would then 

now better about its practicability from the story-telling point 

of view. - ours very sincerely, RRT IS STS."





A little later came the following-





"TH CTTA, CASTT  RAMAR.  ( DAT.)



"M DAR DR A, - Herewith go nine chapters.  I have been a 

little seedy and the two last that I have written seem to me on a 

false venue hence the smallness of the batch.  I have now, I hope, 

in the three last sent, turned the corner, with no great amount of 

dulness.



"The map, with all its names, notes, soundings, and things, should 

mae, I believe, an admirable advertisement for the story.  h



"I hope you got a telegram and letter I forwarded after you to 

Dinnat. - elieve me, yours very sincerely, RRT IS 

STS."





In the afternoon, if fine and dry, we went waling, and Stevenson 

would sometimes tell us stories of his short experience at the 

Scottish ar, and of his first and only brief.  I remember him 

contrasting that with his experiences as an engineer with ob ain, 

who, as manager, was then superintending the building of a 

breawater.  f that time, too, he told the choicest stories, and 

especially of how, against all orders, he bribed ob with five 

shillings to let him go down in the diver's dress.  He gave us a 

splendid description - finer, I thin, than even that in his 

MMRIS - of his sensations on the sea-bottom, which seems to have 

interested him as deeply, and suggested as many strange fancies, as 

anything which he ever came across on the surface.  ut the 

possibility of enterprises of this sort ended - Stevenson lost his 

interest in engineering.



Stevenson's father had, indeed, been much exercised in his day by 

theological questions and difficulties, and though he remained a 

staunch adherent of the stablished Church of Scotland he new well 

and practically what is meant by the term "accommodation," as it is 

used by theologians in reference to creeds and formulas for he had 

over and over again, because of the strict character of the 

subscription required from elders of the Scottish Church declined, 

as I have said, to accept the office.  In a very express sense you 

could see that he bore the mars of his past in many ways - a 

quic, sensitive, in some ways even a fantastic-minded man, yet 

with a strange solidity and common-sense amid it all, ust as 

though ferns with the veritable fairies' seed were to grow out of a 

common stone wall.  He looed lie a man who had not been without 

sleepless nights - without troubles, sorrows, and perplexities, and 

even yet, had not wholly risen above some of them, or the results 

of them.  His voice was "low and sweet" - with ust a possibility 

in it of rising to a shrillish ey.  A sincere and faithful man, 

who had waled very demurely through life, though with a touch of 

sudden, bright, quiet humour and fancy, every now and then crossing 

the grey of his characteristic pensiveness or melancholy, and 

drawing effect from it.  He was most fran and genial with me, and 

I greatly honour his memory. (2)



Thomas Stevenson, with a strange, sad smile, told me how much of a 

disappointment, in the first stage, at all events, ouis (he always 

called his son ouis at home), had caused him, by failing to follow 

up his profession at the Scottish ar.  How much he had looed 

forward, after the engineering was abandoned, to his devoting 

himself to the wor of the arliament House (as the Hall of the 

Chief Court is called in Scotland, from the building having been 

while yet there was a Scottish arliament the place where it sat), 

though truly one cannot help feeling how much Stevenson's very air 

and figure would have been out of eeping among the bewigged, 

pushing, sharp-set, hard-featured, and even red-faced and red-nosed 

(some of them, at any rate) company, who daily waled the 

arliament House, and taled and gossiped there, often of other 

things than law and equity.  "ell, yes, perhaps it was all for the 

best," he said, with a sigh, on my having interected the remar 

that R. . Stevenson was wielding far more influence than he ever 

could have done as a Scottish counsel, even though he had risen 

rapidly in his profession, and become ord-Advocate or even a 

udge.



There was, indeed, a very pathetic ind of haring bac on the 

might-have-beens when I taled with him on this subect.  He had 

reconciled himself in a way to the inevitable, and, lie a sensible 

man, was now inclined to mae the most and the best of it.  The 

marriage, which, on the report of it, had been but a new 

disappointment to him, had, as if by magic, been transformed into a 

blessing in his mind and his wife's by personal contact with anny 

an der riff Stevenson, which no one who ever met her could wonder 

at but, nevertheless, his dream of seeing his only son waling in 

the pathways of the Stevensons, and adorning a profession in 

dinburgh, and so winning new and welcome laurels for the family 

and the name, was still present with him constantly, and by 

contrast, he was depressed with contemplation of the real state of 

the case, when, as I have said, I pointed out to him, as more than 

once I did, what an influence his son was wielding now, not only 

over those near to him, but throughout the world, compared with 

what could have come to him as a lighthouse engineer, however 

successful, or it may be as a briefless advocate or barrister, 

waling, hardly in glory and in oy, the Hall of the dinburgh 

arliament House.  And when I pictured the yet greater influence 

that was sure to come to him, he only shoo his head with that 

smile which tells of hopes long-cherished and lost at last, and of 

resignation gained, as though at stern duty's call and an honest 

desire for the good of those near and dear to him.  It moved me 

more than I can say, and always in the midst of it he adroitly, and 

somewhat abruptly, changed the subect.  Such penalties do parents 

often pay for the honour of giving geniuses to the world.  Here, 

again, it may be true, "the individual withers but the world is 

more and more."



The impression of a ind of tragic fatality was but added to when 

Stevenson would spea of his father in such terms of love and 

admiration as quite moved one, of his desire to please him, of his 

highest respect and gratitude to him, and pride in having such a 

father.  It was most characteristic that when, in his travels in 

America, he met a gentleman who expressed plainly his een 

disappointment on learning that he had but been introduced to the 

son and not to the father - to the as yet but budding author - and 

not to the builder of the great lighthouse beacons that constantly 

saved mariners from shipwrec round many stormy coasts, he should 

record the incident, as his readers will remember, with such a 

strange mixture of a pride and filial gratitude, and half humorous 

humiliation.  Such is the penalty a son of genius often pays in 

heart-throbs for the inability to do aught else but follow his 

destiny - follow his star, even though as Dante says-





"Se tu segui tua stella

on puoi fallire a glorioso porto." (3)





hat added a een thrill as of quivering flesh exposed, was that 

Thomas Stevenson on one side was exactly the man to appreciate such 

attainments and wor in another, and I often wondered how far the 

sense of dinburgh propriety and worldly estimates did weigh with 

him here.



Mr Stevenson mentioned to me a peculiar fact which has since been 

noted by his son, that, notwithstanding the ind of wor he had so 

successfully engaged in, he was no mathematician, and had to submit 

his calculations to another to be wored out in definite 

mathematical formulae.  Thomas Stevenson gave one the impression of 

a remarably sweet, great personality, grave, anxious, almost 

morbidly forecasting, yet full of childlie hope and ready 

affection, but, perhaps, so earnestly taen up with some points as 

to exaggerate their importance and be too self-conscious and easily 

offended in respect to them.  ut there was no affectation in him.  

He was simple-minded, sincere to the core most indly, homely, 

hospitable, much intent on brotherly offices.  He had the Scottish 

RRIDM too - he could tolerate nothing mean or creeping and 

his eye would lighten and glance in a striing manner when such was 

spoen of.  I have since heard that his charities were very 

extensive, and dispensed in the most hidden and secret ways.  He 

acted here on the Scripture direction, "et not thy left hand now 

what thy right hand doeth."  He was much exercised when I saw him 

about some defects, as he held, in the methods of Scotch education 

(for he was a true lover of youth, and cared more for character 

being formed than for heads being merely crammed).  Sagacious, with 

fine forecast, with a high ideal, and yet up to a certain point a 

most tolerant temper, he was a fine specimen of the Scottish 

gentleman.  His son tells that, as he was engaged in wor 

calculated to benefit the world and to save life, he would not for 

long tae out a patent for his inventions, and thus lost immense 

sums.  I can well believe that  it seems quite in eeping with my 

impressions of the man.  There was nothing stolid or selfishly 

absorbed in him.  He bore the mars of deep, true, honest feeling, 

true benevolence, and open-handed generosity, and despite the son's 

great pen-craft, and inventive power, would have forgiven my saying 

that sometimes I have had a doubt whether the father was not, after 

all, the greater man of the two, though certainly not, lie the 

hero of I MMRIAM, moulded "in colossal calm."



In theological matters, in which Thomas Stevenson had been much and 

deeply exercised, he held very strong views, leading decisively to 

ultra-Calvinism but, as I myself could well sympathise with such 

views, if I did not hold them, nowing well the strange ways in 

which they had gone to form grand, if sometimes sternly forbidding 

characters, there were no cross-purposes as there might have been 

with some on that subect.  And always I felt I had an original 

character and a most interesting one to study.



This is another very characteristic letter to me from Davos lat





"CHAT , DAS, RISS,

SITRAD.  ( DAT.)



"M DAR DR A, - ou must thin me a forgetful rogue, as indeed 

I am for I have but now told my publisher to send you a copy of 

the AMIIAR STDIS.  However, I own I have delayed this letter 

till I could send you the enclosed.  Remembering the night at 

raemar, when we visited the picture-gallery, I hoped they might 

amuse you.



"ou see we do some publishing hereaway.



"ith ind regards, believe me, always yours faithfully,

RRT IS STS."



"I shall hope to see you in town in May."





The enclosed was the second series of MRA MMS, by R. . 

Stevenson, printed by Samuel sbourne.  My answer to this letter 

brought the following





"CHAT-, DAS,

ARI 1st, 12.



"M DAR DR A, - A good day to date this letter, which is, in 

fact, a confession of incapacity.  During my wife's wretched 

illness - or I should say the worst of it, for she is not yet 

rightly well - I somewhat lost my head, and entirely lost a great 

quire of corrected proofs.  This is one of the results  I hope 

there are none more serious.  I was never so sic of any volume as 

I was of that I was continually receiving fresh proofs with fresh 

infinitesimal difficulties.  I was ill I did really fear, for my 

wife was worse than ill.  ell, 'tis out now and though I have 

already observed several carelessnesses myself, and now here is 

another of your finding - of which indeed, I ought to be ashamed - 

it will only ustify the sweeping humility of the preface.



"Symonds was actually dining with us when your letter came, and I 

communicated your remars, which pleased him.  He is a far better 

and more interesting thing than his boos.



"The elephant was my wife's, so she is proportionately elate you 

should have piced it out for praise from a collection, let us add, 

so replete with the highest qualities of art.



"My wiced carcass, as ohn nox calls it, holds together 

wonderfully.  In addition to many other things, and a volume of 

travel, I find I have written since December ninety Cornhill pp. of 

Magaine wor - essays and stories - 4, words and I am none 

the worse - I am better.  I begin to hope I may, if not outlive 

this wolverine upon my shoulders, at least carry him bravely lie 

Symonds or Alexander ope.  I begin to tae a pride in that hope.



"I shall be much interested to see your criticisms  you might 

perhaps send them on to me.  I believe you now that I am not 

dangerous - one folly I have not - I am not touchy under criticism.



"Sam and my wife both beg to be remembered, and Sam also sends as a 

present a wor of his own. - ours very sincerely,

RRT IS STS."





As indicating the estimate of many of the good dinburgh people of 

Stevenson and the Stevensons that still held sway up to so late a 

date as 193, I will here extract two characteristic passages from 

the letters of the friend and correspondent of these days ust 

referred to, and to whom I had sent a copy of the ATAATA 

Magaine, with an article of mine on Stevenson.





"If you can excuse the garrulity of age, I can tell you one or two 

things about ouis Stevenson, his father and even his grandfather, 

which you may wor up some other day, as you have so deftly 

embedded in the ATAATA article that small remar on his acting.  

our paper is pleasant and modest  most of R. . Stevenson's 

admirers are inclined to lay it on far too thic.  That he is a 

genius we all admit but his genius, if fine, is limited.  or 

example, he cannot paint (or at least he never has painted) a 

woman.  o more could ettes Douglas, silful artist though he was 

in his own special line, and I shall tell you a remar of Russel's 

thereon some day. (4)  There are women in his boos, but there is 

none of the beauty and subtlety of womanhood in them.



"R. . Stevenson I new well as a lad and often met him and taled 

with him.  He acted in private theatricals got up by the late 

rofessor leeming enin.  ut he had then, as always, a pretty 

guid conceit o' himsel' - which his clique have done nothing to 

chec.  His father and his grandfather (I have danced with his 

mother before her marriage) I new better but 'the family 

theologian,' as some of R. . Stevenson's friends dabbed his 

father, was a very touchy theologian, and denounced any one who in 

the least differed from his extreme Calvinistic views.  I came 

under his lash most unwittingly in this way myself.  ut for this 

twist, he was a good fellow - ind and hospitable - and a really 

able man in his profession.  His father-in-law, R. . Stevenson's 

maternal grandfather, was the Rev. Dr alfour, minister of Colinton 

- one of the finest-looing old men I ever saw - tall, upright, and 

ruddy at eighty.  ut he was marvellously feeble as a preacher, and 

often said things that were deliciously, unconsciously, 

unintentionally laughable, if not witty.  e were near Colinton for 

some years and Mr Russell (of the SCTSMA), who once attended the 

arish Church with us, was greatly ticled by alfour discoursing 

on the story of oseph and otiphar's wife, remaring that Mrs -'s 

conduct was 'highly improper'"



The estimate of R. . Stevenson was not and could not be final in 

this case, for IR  HRMIST and CATRIA were yet unwritten, 

not to spea of others, but the passages reflect a certain side of 

dinburgh opinion, illustrating the old Scripture doctrine that a 

prophet has honour everywhere but in his own country.  And the 

passages themselves bear evidence that I violate no confidence 

then, for they were given to me to be wored into any after-effort 

I might mae on Stevenson.  My friend was a good and an acute 

critic who had done some acceptable literary wor in his day.







CHATR III - TH CHID ATHR  TH MA







R. . STS was born on 13th ovember 15, the very year of 

the death of his grandfather, Robert Stevenson, whom he has so 

finely celebrated.  As a mere child he gave toen of his character.  

As soon as he could read, he was een for boos, and, before very 

long, had read all the story-boos he could lay hands on and, when 

the stoc ran out, he would go and loo in at all the shop windows 

within reach, and try to piece out the stories from the bits 

exposed in open pages and the woodcuts.



He had a nurse of very remarable character - evidently a paragon - 

who deeply influenced him and did much to form his young mind - 

Alison Cunningham, who, in his uvenile lingo, became "Cumy," and 

who not only was never forgotten, but to the end was treated as his 

"second mother."  In his dedication of his CHID'S ARD  RSS 

to her, he says





"My second mother, my first wife,

The angel of my infant life."





Her copy of IDAD was inscribed to her by the hand of 

Stevenson, thus





"T CM, RM HR , TH ATHR.

"SRRR, 1TH  1."





Serryvore was the name of Stevenson's ournemouth home, so named 

after one of the Stevenson lighthouses.  His first volume, A 

IAD A has this pretty dedication, inscribed in a neat, 

small hand





"M DAR CM, - If you had not taen so much trouble with me all 

the years of my childhood, this little boo would never have been 

written.  Many a long night you sat up with me when I was ill.  I 

wish I could hope, by way of return, to amuse a single evening for 

you with my little boo.  ut whatever you thin of it, I now you 

will thin indly of

TH ATHR."





"Cumy" was perhaps the most influential teacher Stevenson had.  

hat she and his mother taught too effect and abode with him, 

which was hardly the case with any other of his teachers.





"In contrast to oethe," says Mr aildon, "Stevenson was but little 

affected by his relations to women, and, when this point is fully 

gone into, it will probably be found that his mother and nurse in 

childhood, and his wife and step-daughter in later life, are about 

the only women who seriously influenced either his character or his 

art." (p. 32).





hen Mr elman is celebrating Stevenson for the consistency and 

continuity of his undogmatic religion, he is almost throughout 

celebrating "Cumy" and her influence, though unconsciously.  Here, 

again, we have an apt and yet more striing illustration, after 

that of the good ord Shaftesbury and many others, of the deep and 

lasting effect a good and earnest woman, of whom the world may 

never hear, may have had upon a youngster of whom all the world 

shall hear.  hen Mr elman says that "the religious element in 

Stevenson was not a thing of late growth, but an integral part and 

vital interest of his life," he but points us bac to the earlier 

religious influences to which he had been effectually subect.  

"His faith was not for himself alone, and the phases of 

Christianity which it has asserted are peculiarly suited to the 

spiritual needs of many in the present time."



e should not lay so much weight as Mr elman does on the mere 

number of times "the Divine name" is found in Stevenson's writings, 

but there is something in such confessions as the following to his 

father, when he was, amid hardship and illness, in aris in 1





"Still I believe in myself and my fellow-men and the od who made 

us all.... I am lonely and sic and out of heart.  ell, I still 

hope I still believe I still see the good in the inch, and cling 

to it.  It is not much, perhaps, but it is always something."





es, "Cumy" was a very effective teacher, whose influence and 

teaching long remained.  His other teachers, however famous and 

highly gifted, did not attain to such success with him.  And 

because of this non-success they blamed him, as is usual.  He was 

fond of playing truant - declared, indeed, that he was about as 

methodic a truant as ever could have existed.  He much loved to go 

on long wanderings by himself on the entland Hills and read about 

the Covenanters, and while yet a youth of sixteen he wrote TH 

TAD RISI - a pamphlet in sie and a piece of fine wor - 

which was duly published, is now scarce, and fetches a high price.  

He had made himself thoroughly familiar with all the odd old 

corners of dinburgh - ohn nox's haunts and so on, all which he 

has turned to account in essays, descriptions and in stories - 

especially in CATRIA.  hen a mere youth at school, as he tells 

us himself, he had little or no desire to carry off pries and do 

ust as other boys did he was always wishing to observe, and to 

see, and try things for himself - was, in fact, in the eyes of 

schoolmasters and tutors something of an IDR, with splendid gifts 

which he would not rightly apply.  He was applying them rightly, 

though not in their way.  It is not only in his A R IDRS 

that this confession is made, but elsewhere, as in his essay on A 

C MAAI, where he says, "I was always busy on my own 

private end, which was to learn to write.  I ept always two boos 

in my pocet, one to read and one to write in"



hen he went to College it was still the same - he tells us in the 

funniest way how he managed to wheedle a certificate for ree out 

of rofessor lacie, though the rofessor owned "his face was not 

familiar to him"  He fared very differently when, afterwards his 

father, eager that he should follow his profession, got him to 

enter the civil engineering class under rofessor leeming enin.  

He still stuc to his old courses - wandering about, and, in 

sheltered corners, writing in the open air, and was not present in 

class more than a doen times.  hen the session was ended he went 

up to try for a certificate from leeming enin.  "o, no, Mr 

Stevenson," said the rofessor "I might give it in a doubtful 

case, but yours is not doubtful  you have not ept my classes."  

And the most characteristic thing - honourable to both men - is to 

come for this was the beginning of a friendship which grew and 

strengthened and is finally celebrated in the younger man's setch 

of the elder.  He learned from rofessor leeming enin, perhaps 

unconsciously, more of the HMAIRS, than consciously he did of 

engineering.  A friend of mine, who new well both the Stevenson 

family and the alfours, to which R. . Stevenson's mother 

belonged, recalls, as we have seen, his acting in the private 

theatricals that were got up by the rofessor, and adds, "He was 

then a very handsome fellow, and looed splendidly as Sir Charles 

omander, and essayed, not wholly without success, Sir eter 

Teale," which one can well believe, no less than that he acted 

such parts splendidly as well as looed them.



MA'S MAAI, immediately after his death, published the 

following poem, which too a very pathetic touch from the 

circumstances of its appearance - the more that, while it 

imaginatively and finely commemorated these days of truant 

wanderings, it showed the ruling passion for home and the old 

haunts, strongly and vividly, even not unnigh to death





"The tropics vanish, and meseems that I,

rom Halerside, from topmost Allermuir,

r steep Caeretton, dreaming gae again.

ar set in fields and woods, the town I see

Spring gallant from the shallows of her smoe,

Cragg'd, spired, and turreted, her virgin fort

eflagg'd.  About, on seaward drooping hills,

ew folds of city glitter.  ast, the orth

heels ample waters set with sacred isles,

And populous ife smoes with a score of towns,

There, on the sunny frontage of a hill,

Hard by the house of ings, repose the dead,

My dead, the ready and the strong of word.

Their wors, the salt-encrusted, still survive

The sea bombards their founded towers the night

Thrills pierced with their strong lamps.  The artificers,

ne after one, here in this grated cell,

here the rain erases and the rust consumes,

ell upon lasting silence.  Continents

And continental oceans intervene

A sea uncharted, on a lampless isle,

nvirons and confines their wandering child

In vain.  The voice of generations dead

Summons me, sitting distant, to arise,

My numerous footsteps nimbly to retrace,

And all mutation over, stretch me down

In that denoted city of the dead."







CHATR I - HRDIT ISTRATD







AT first sight it would seem hard to trace any illustration of the 

doctrine of heredity in the case of this master of romance.  eorge 

liot's dictum that we are, each one of us, but an omnibus carrying 

down the traits of our ancestors, does not appear at all to hold 

here.  This fanciful realist, this naive-wistful humorist, this 

dreamy mystical casuist, crossed by the innocent bohemian, this 

serious and genial essayist, in whom the deep thought was hidden by 

the gracious play of wit and phantasy, came, on the father's side, 

of a stoc of what the world regarded as a quiet, ingenious, 

demure, practical, home-eeping people.  In his rich colour, 

originality, and graceful air, it is almost as though the bloom of 

aponica came on a rich old orchard apple-tree, all out of season 

too.  Those who go hard on heredity would say, perhaps, that he was 

the result of some strange bac-stroe.  ut, on closer 

examination, we need not go so far.  His grandfather, Robert 

Stevenson, the great lighthouse-builder, the man who reared the 

iron-bound pillar on the destructive ell Roc, and set life-saving 

lights there, was very intent on his professional wor, yet he had 

his ideal, and romantic, and adventurous side.  In the delightful 

setch which his famous grandson gave of him, does he not tell of 

the oy Robert Stevenson had on the annual voyage in the IHTHS 

ACHT - how it was looed forward to, yearned for, and how, when he 

had alter Scott on board, his fund of story and reminiscence all 

through the tour never failed - how Scott drew upon it in TH 

IRAT and the notes to TH IRAT, and with what pride Robert 

Stevenson preserved the lines Scott wrote in the lighthouse album 

at the ell Roc on that occasion





"HARS ITR



"ar in the bosom of the deep

'er these wild shelves my watch I eep,

A ruddy gem of changeful light

ound on the dusy brow of night.

The seaman bids my lustre hail,

And scorns to strie his timorous sail."





And how in 15 the old man, drawing nigh unto death, was with the 

utmost difficulty dissuaded from going the voyage once more, and 

was found furtively in his room pacing his portmanteau in spite of 

the protests of all his family, and would have gone but for the 

utter weaness of death.



His father was also a splendid engineer was full of invention and 

devoted to his profession, but he, too, was not without his 

romances, and even vagaries.  He loved a story, was a fine teller 

of stories, used to sit at night and spin the most wondrous yarns, 

a man of much reserve, yet also of much power in discourse, with an 

aptness and felicity in the use of phrases - so much so, as his son 

tells, that on his deathbed, when his power of speech was passing 

from him, and he couldn't articulate the right word, he was silent 

rather than use the wrong one.  I shall never forget how in these 

early morning wals at raemar, finding me sympathetic, he unbent 

with the air of a man who had unexpectedly found something he had 

sought, and was fairly confidential.



n the mother's side our author came of ministers.  His maternal 

grandfather, the Rev. Dr alfour of Colinton, was a man of handsome 

presence, tall, venerable-looing, and not without a mingled 

authority and humour of his own - no very great preacher, I have 

heard, but would sometimes bring a smile to the faces of his 

hearers by very naive and original ways of putting things.  R. . 

Stevenson quaintly tells a story of how his grandfather when he had 

physic to tae, and was indulged in a sweet afterwards, yet would 

not allow the child to have a sweet because he had not had the 

physic.  A veritable Calvinist in daily action - from him, no 

doubt, our subect drew much of his interest in certain directions 

- ohn nox, Scottish history, the '15 and the '45, and no doubt 

much that ustifies the line "something of shorter-catechist," as 

applied by Henley to Stevenson among very contrasted traits indeed.



ut strange truly are the interblendings of race, and the way in 

which traits of ancestors reappear, modifying and transforming each 

other.  The gardener nows what can be done by grafts and buddings 

but more wonderful far than anything there, are the mysterious 

blendings and outbursts of what is old and forgotten, along with 

what is wholly new and strange, and all going to produce often what 

we call sometimes eccentricity, and sometimes originality and 

genius.



Mr . . eorge, in SCTTISH TS AD RIS, wrote as follows on 

Stevenson's inheritances and indebtedness to certain of his 

ancestors





"About 15, ames alfour, one of the rincipal Clers of the 

Court of Session, married ridget, daughter of Chalmers of 

albaithan, eithhall, and that estate was for some time in the 

name of alfour.  His son, ames alfour of albaithan, Merchant 

and Magistrate of dinburgh, paid poll-tax in 19, but by 199 the 

land had been sold.  This was probably due to the fact that alfour 

was one of the overnors of the Darien Company.  His grandson, 

ames alfour of ilrig (15 - 195), sometime rofessor of Moral 

hilosophy in dinburgh niversity, whose portrait is setched in 

CATRIA, also made a arioch [Aberdeenshire district] marriage, 

his wife being Cecilia, fifth daughter of Sir ohn lphinstone, 

second baronet of ogie (lphinstone) and Sheriff of Aberdeen, by 

Mary, daughter of Sir ilbert lliot, first baronet of Minto.



"Referring to the Minto descent, Stevenson claims to have 'shaen a 

spear in the Debatable and and shouted the slogan of the lliots.'  

He evidently new little or nothing of his relations on the 

lphinstone side.  The ogie lphinstones were a cadet branch of 

lac, an estate acquired by icholas lphinstone in 1499.  illiam 

lphinstone, a younger son of ames of lac, and liabeth ood of 

onnyton, married Margaret orbes, and was father of Sir ames 

lphinstone, art., of ogie, so created in 11. . . .



"Stevenson would have been delighted to acnowledge his 

relationship, remote though it was, to 'the olf of adenoch,' who 

burned lgin Cathedral without the arl of ildare's excuse that he 

thought the ishop was in it and to the olf's son, the ictor of 

Harlaw [and] to his nephew 'ohn 'Coull,' Constable of rance. . . 

. Also among Tusitala's in may be noted, in addition to the later 

ordons of ight, the Tiger arl of Crawford, familiarly nown as 

'arl eardie,' the 'iced Master' of the same line, who was 

fatally stabbed by a Dundee cobbler 'for taing a stoup of drin 

from him' ady ean indsay, who ran away with 'a common ocey 

with the horn,' and latterly became a beggar David indsay, the 

last aird of dell [a lichtsome indsay fallen on evil days], who 

ended his days as hostler at a irwall inn, and 'Mussel Mou'ed 

Charlie,' the acobite ballad-singer.



"Stevenson always believed that he had a strong spiritual affinity 

to Robert ergusson.  It is more than probable that there was a 

distant maternal affinity as well.  Margaret orbes, the mother of 

Sir ames lphinstone, the purchaser of ogie, has not been 

identified, but it is probable she was of the branch of the 

Tolquhon orbeses who previously owned ogie.  ergusson's mother, 

liabeth orbes, was the daughter of a ildrummy tacsman, who by 

constant tradition is stated to have been of the house of Tolquhon.  

It would certainly be interesting if this suggested connection 

could be proved." (5)





"rom his Highland ancestors," says the ARTR RI, "ouis 

drew the strain of Celtic melancholy with all its perils and 

possibilities, and its inship, to the mood of day-dreaming, which 

has flung over so many of his pages now the vivid light wherein 

figures imagined grew as real as flesh and blood, and yet, again, 

the ghostly, strange, lonesome, and stinging mist under whose spell 

we see the world bewitched, and every obect quicens with a throb 

of infectious terror."



Here, as in many other cases, we see how the traits of ancestry 

reappear and transform other strains, strangely the more remote 

often being the strongest and most persistent and wonderful.



"It is through his father, strange as it may seem," says Mr 

aildon, "that Stevenson gets the Celtic elements so mared in his 

person, character, and genius for his father's pedigree runs bac 

to the Highland clan Macgregor, the in of Rob Roy.  Stevenson thus 

drew in Celtic strains from both sides - from the alfours and the 

Stevensons alie - and in his strange, dreamy, beautiful, and often 

far-removed fancies we have the finest and most effective witness 

of it."



Mr illiam Archer, in his own characteristic way, has brought the 

inheritances from the two sides of the house into more direct 

contact and contrast in an article he wrote in TH DAI CHRIC 

on the appearance of the TTRS T AMI AD RIDS.





"These letters show," he says, "that Stevenson's was not one of 

those sunflower temperaments which turn by instinct, not effort, 

towards the light, and are, as Mr rancis Thompson puts it, 

'heartless and happy, laceying their god.'  The strains of his 

heredity were very curiously, but very clearly, mingled.  It may 

surprise some readers to find him speaing of 'the family evil, 

despondency,' but he spoe with nowledge.  He inherited from his 

father not only a stern Scottish intentness on the moral aspect of 

life ('I would rise from the dead to preach'), but a mared 

disposition to melancholy and hypochondria.  rom his mother, on 

the other hand, he derived, along with his physical frailty, a 

resolute and cheery stoicism.  These two elements in his nature 

fought many a hard fight, and the besieging forces from without - 

ill-health, poverty, and at one time family dissensions - were by 

no means without allies in the inner citadel of his soul.  His 

spirit was courageous in the truest sense of the word  by effort 

and conviction, not by temperamental insensibility to fear.  It is 

clear that there was a period in his life (and that before the 

worst of his bodily ills came upon him) when he was often within 

measurable distance of Carlylean gloom.  He was twenty-four when he 

wrote thus, from Swanston, to Mrs Sitwell



"'It is warmer a bit but my body is most decrepit, and I can ust 

manage to be cheery and tread down hypochondria under foot by wor.  

I lead such a funny life, utterly without interest or pleasure 

outside of my wor  nothing, indeed, but wor all day long, except 

a short wal alone on the cold hills, and meals, and a couple of 

pipes with my father in the evening.  It is surprising how it suits 

me, and how happy I eep.'





"This is the serenity which arises, not from the absence of 

fuliginous elements in the character, but from a potent smoe-

consuming faculty, and an inflexible will to use it.  ine years 

later he thus admonishes his bacsliding parent





"'M DAR MTHR, - I give my father up.  I give him a parable  

that the averley novels are better reading for every day than the 

tragic I.  And he taes it bac-side foremost, and shaes his 

head, and is gloomier than ever.  Tell him that I give him up.  I 

don't want no such a parent.  This is not the man for my money.  I 

do not call that by the name of religion which fills a man with 

bile.  I write him a whole letter, bidding him beware of extremes, 

and telling him that his gloom is gallows-worthy and I get bac an 

answer -.  erish the thought of it.



"'Here am I on the threshold of another year, when, according to 

all human foresight, I should long ago have been resolved into my 

elements  here am I, who you were persuaded was born to disgrace 

you - and, I will do you the ustice to add, on no such 

insufficient grounds - no very burning discredit when all is done 

here am I married, and the marriage recognised to be a blessing of 

the first order.  A1 at loyd's.  There is he, at his not first 

youth, able to tae more exercise than I at thirty-three, and 

gaining a stone's weight, a thing of which I am incapable.  There 

are you has the man no gratitude . . .



"'ven the Shorter Catechism, not the merriest epitome of religion, 

and a wor exactly as pious although not quite so true as the 

multiplication table - even that dry-as-dust epitome begins with a 

heroic note.  hat is man's chief end  et him study that and as 

himself if to refuse to enoy od's indest gifts is in the spirit 

indicated.'





"As may be udged from this half-playful, half-serious 

remonstrance, Stevenson's relation to his parents was eminently 

human and beautiful.  The family dissensions above alluded to 

belonged only to a short but painful period, when the father could 

not reconcile himself to the discovery that the son had ceased to 

accept the formulas of Scottish Calvinism.  In the eyes of the 

older man such heterodoxy was for the moment indistinguishable from 

atheism but he soon arrived at a better understanding of his son's 

position.  othing appears more unmistaably in these letters than 

the ingrained theism of Stevenson's way of thought.  The poet, the 

romancer within him, revolted from the conception of formless 

force.  A personal deity was a necessary character in the drama, as 

he conceived it.  And his morality, though (or inasmuch as) it 

dwelt more on positive indness than on negative lawlessness, was, 

as he often insisted, very much ain to the morality of the ew 

Testament."





Anyway it is clear that much in the interminglings of blood we CA 

trace, may go to account for not a little in Stevenson.  His 

peculiar interest in the enormities of old-time feuds, the 

excesses, the ealousies, the queer psychological pules, the 

desire to wor on the outlying and morbid, and even the unallowed 

and unhallowed, for purposes of romance - the delight in dealing 

with revelations of primitive feeling and the out-bursts of the 

mere natural man always strangely checed and diverted by the 

uprise of other tendencies to the dreamy, impalpable, vague, weird 

and horrible.  There was the undoubted Celtic element in him 

underlying what seemed foreign to it, the disregard of 

conventionality in one phase, and the falling under it in another - 

the reaction and the retreat from what had attracted and interested 

him, and then the return upon it, as with added est because of the 

retreat.  The confessed Hedonist, enoying life and boasting of it 

ust a little, and yet the uritan in him, as it were, all the time 

eyeing himself as from some loophole of retreat, and then 

commenting on his own behaviour as a Hedonist and ohemian.  This 

clearly was not what most struc eerbohm Tree, during the time he 

was in close contact with Stevenson, while arranging the production 

of A ASTI at the Haymaret Theatre, for he sees, or confesses 

to seeing, only one side, and that the most assertive, and in a 

sense, unreal one





"Stevenson," says Mr Tree, "always seemed to me an epicure in life.  

He was always intent on extracting the last drop of honey from 

every flower that came in his way.  He was absorbed in the business 

of the moment, however trivial.  As a companion, he was 

delightfully witty as a personality, as much a creature of romance 

as his own creations."





This is simple, and it loos sincere but it does not touch 'tother 

side, or hint at, not to say, solve the problem of Stevenson's 

personality.  Had he been the mere Hedonist he could never have 

done the wor he did.  Mr eerbohm Tree certainly did not there see 

far or all round.



Miss Simpson says





"Mr Henley recalls him to dinburgh fol as he was and as the true 

Stevenson would have wished to be nown - a queer, inexplicable 

creature, his Celtic blood showing lie a vein of unnown metal in 

the stolid, steady roc of his sure-founded Stevensonian pedigree.  

His cousin and model, 'ob' Stevenson, the art critic, showed that 

this foreign element came from the men who lit our guiding lights 

for seamen, not from the gentle-blooded alfours.



"Mr Henley is right in saying that the gifted boy had not much 

humour.  hen the oe was against himself he was very thin-sinned 

and had a want of balance.  This made him feel his honest father's 

sensible remars lie the sting of a whip."





Miss Simpson then proceeds to say





"The R. . Stevenson of old dinburgh days was a conceited, 

egotistical youth, but a true and honest one  a youth full of fire 

and sentiment, protesting he was misunderstood, though he was not.  

osing as 'elvet Coat' among the slums, he did no good to himself.  

He had not the Dicens aptitude for depicting the ways of life of 

his adopted friends.  hen with refined udgment he wanted a figure 

for a novel, he went bac to the ar he scorned in his callow days 

and then drew in IR  HRMIST."







CHATR  - TRAS







HIS interest in engineering soon went - his mind full of stories 

and fancies and human nature.  As he had told his mother  he did 

not care about finding what was "the strain on a bridge," he wanted 

to now something of human beings.



o doubt, much to the disappointment and grief of his father, who 

wished him as an only son to carry on the traditions of the family, 

though he had written two engineering essays of utmost promise, the 

engineering was given up, and he consented to study law.  He had 

already contributed to College Magaines, and had had even a short 

spell of editing one of one of these he has given a racy account.  

ery soon after his call to the ar articles and essays from his 

pen began to appear in MACMIA'S, and later, more regularly in 

the CRHI.  Careful readers soon began to note here the presence 

of a new force.  He had gone on the IAD A and an account of 

it was in hand and had done that tour in the Cevennes which he has 

described under the title TRAS ITH A D I TH CS, 

with Modestine, sometimes doubting which was the doney, but on 

that tour a chill caught either developed a germ of lung disease 

already present, or produced it and the results unfortunately 

remained.



He never practised at the ar, though he tells facetiously of his 

one brief.  He had chosen his own vocation, which was literature, 

and the years which followed were, despite the delicacy which 

showed itself, very busy years.  He produced volume on volume.  He 

had written many stories which had never seen the light, but, as he 

says, passed through the ordeal of the fire by more or less 

circuitous ways.



y this time some trouble and cause for anxiety had arisen about 

the lungs, and trials of various places had been made.  RDRD 

STH suggests the Mediterranean, sunny Italy, the Riviera.  Then a 

sea-trip to America was recommended and undertaen.  nfortunately, 

he got worse there, his original cause of trouble was complicated 

with others, and the medical treatment given was stupid, and 

exaggerated some of the symptoms instead of removing them, All 

along - up, at all events, to the time of his settlement in Samoa - 

Stevenson was more or less of an invalid.



Indeed, were I ever to write an essay on the art of wisely "laying-

to," as the sailors say, I would point it by a reference to R. . 

Stevenson.  or there is a wise way of "laying-to" that does not 

imply inaction, but discreet, well-directed effort, against 

contrary winds and rough seas, that is, amid obstacles and 

drawbacs, and even ill-health, where passive and active may 

balance and give effect to each other.  Stevenson was by native 

instinct and temperament a rover - a lover of adventure, of strange 

by-ways, errant tracts (as seen in his IAD A and TRAS 

ITH A D THRH TH CS - seen yet more, perhaps, in a 

certain account of a voyage to America as a steerage passenger), 

lofty mountain-tops, with stronger air, and strange and novel 

surroundings.  He would fain, lie lysses, be at home in foreign 

lands, maing acquaintance with outlying races, with





"Cities of men,

And manners, climates, councils, governments

Myself not least, but honoured of them all,

ar on the ringing plains of windy Troy."





If he could not move about as he would, he would invent, mae fancy 

serve him instead of experience.  e thus owe something to the 

staying and restraining forces in him, and a wise "laying-to" - for 

his wors, which are, in large part, finely-healthy, obective, and 

in almost everything unlie the wor of an invalid, yet, in some 

degree, were but the devices to beguile the burdens of an invalid's 

days.  Instead of remaining in our climate, it might be, to lie 

listless and helpless half the day, with no companion but his own 

thoughts and fancies (not always so pleasant either, if, lie 

ranenstein's monster, or, better still lie the imp in the bottle 

in the ARAIA IHTS, you cannot, once for all liberate them, and 

set them adrift on their own charges to visit other people), he 

made a home in the sweeter air and more steady climate of the South 

acific, where, under the Southern Cross, he could safely and 

beneficially be as active as he would be involuntarily idle at 

home, or wor only under pressure of hampering conditions.  That 

was surely an illustration of the true "laying-to" with an 

unaffectedly brave, bright resolution in it.







CHATR I - SM ARIR TTRS







CAR was wont to say that, next to a faithful portrait, familiar 

letters were the best medium to reveal a man.  The letters must 

have been written with no idea of being used for this end, however 

- free, artless, the unstudied self-revealings of mind and heart.  

ow, these letters of R. . Stevenson, written to his friends in 

ngland, have a vast value in this way - they reveal the man - 

reveal him in his strength and his weaness - his ready gift in 

pleasing and adapting himself to those with whom he corresponded, 

and his great power at once of adapting himself to his 

circumstances and of humorously rising superior to them.  hen he 

was ill and almost penniless in San rancisco, he could give Mr 

Colvin this account of his daily routine





"Any time between eight and half-past nine in the morning a slender 

gentleman in an ulster, with a volume buttoned into the breast of 

it, maybe observed leaving o.  ush and descending owell with 

an active step.  The gentleman is R. . Stevenson the volume 

relates to enamin ranlin, on whom he meditates one of his 

charming essays.  He descends owell, crosses Maret, and descends 

in Sixth on a branch of the original ine Street Coffee-House, no 

less. . . . He seats himself at a table covered with waxcloth, and 

a pampered menial of High-Dutch extraction, and, indeed, as yet 

only partially extracted, lays before him a cup of coffee, a roll, 

and a pat of butter, all, to quote the deity, very good.  A while 

ago, and R. . Stevenson used to find the supply of butter 

insufficient but he has now learned the art to exactitude, and 

butter and roll expire at the same moment.  or this reection he 

pays ten cents, or fivepence sterling.



"Half an hour later, the inhabitants of ush Street observed the 

same slender gentleman armed, lie eorge ashington, with his 

little hatchet, splitting indling, and breaing coal for his fire.  

He does this quasi-publicly upon the window-sill but this is not 

to be attributed to any love of notoriety, though he is indeed vain 

of his prowess with the hatchet (which he persists in calling an 

axe), and daily surprised at the perpetuation of his fingers.  The 

reason is this  That the sill is a strong supporting beam, and 

that blows of the same emphasis in other parts of his room might 

noc the entire shanty into hell.  Thenceforth, for from three 

hours, he is engaged darly with an in-bottle.  et he is not 

blacing his boots, for the only pair that he possesses are 

innocent of lustre, and wear the natural hue of the material turned 

up with caed and venerable slush.  The youngest child of his 

landlady remars several times a day, as this strange occupant 

enters or quits the house, 'Dere's de author.'  Can it be that this 

bright-haired innocent has found the true clue to the mystery  The 

being in question is, at least, poor enough to belong to that 

honourable craft."





Here are a few letters belonging to the winter of 1-, nearly 

all written from Saranac ae, in the Adirondacs, celebrated by 

merson, and now a most popular holiday resort in the nited 

States, and were originally published in SCRIR'S MAAI. . . 

"It should be said that, after his long spell of weaness at 

ournemouth, Stevenson had gone est in search of health among the 

blea hill summits - 'on the Canadian border of ew or State, 

very unsettled and primitive and cold.'  He had made the voyage in 

an ocean tramp, the DAT HI, the sort of craft which any 

person not a born child of the sea would shun in horror.  

Stevenson, however, had 'the finest time conceivable on board the 

"strange floating menagerie."'"  Thus he describes it in a letter 

to Mr Henry ames





"Stallions and moneys and matches made our cargo and the vast 

continent of these incongruities rolled the while lie a haystac 

and the stallions stood hypnotised by the motion, looing through 

the port at our dinner-table, and wined when the crocery was 

broen and the little moneys stared at each other in their cages, 

and were thrown overboard lie little bluish babies and the big 

money, aco, scoured about the ship and rested willingly in my 

arms, to the ruin of my clothing and the man of the stallions made 

a bower of the blac tarpaulin, and sat therein at the feet of a 

raddled divinity, lie a picture on a box of chocolates and the 

other passengers, when they were not sic, looed on and laughed.  

Tae all this picture, and mae it roll till the bell shall sound 

unexpected notes and the fittings shall brea loose in our 

stateroom, and you have the voyage of the DAT HI.  She 

arrived in the port of ew or without beer, porter, soda-water, 

curacoa, fresh meat, or fresh water and yet we lived, and we 

regret her."





He discovered this that there is no oy in the niverse comparable 

to life on a villainous ocean tramp, rolling through a horrible sea 

in company with a cargo of cattle.





"I have got one good thing of my sea voyage it is proved the sea 

agrees heartily with me, and my mother lies it so if I get any 

better, or no worse, my mother will liely hire a yacht for a month 

or so in the summer.  ood ord what fun  ealth is only useful 

for two things  a yacht and a string quartette.  or these two I 

will sell my soul.  xcept for these I hold that  pounds a year 

is as much as anybody can possibly want and I have had more, so I 

now, for the extra coins were of no use, excepting for illness, 

which damns everything.  I was so happy on board that ship, I could 

not have believed it possible we had the beastliest weather, and 

many discomforts but the mere fact of its being a tramp ship gave 

us many comforts.  e could cut about with the men and officers, 

stay in the wheel-house, discuss all manner of things, and really 

be a little at sea.  And truly there is nothing else.  I had 

literally forgotten what happiness was, and the full mind - full of 

external and physical things, not full of cares and labours, and 

rot about a fellow's behaviour.  My heart literally sang I truly 

care for nothing so much as for that.



"To go ashore for your letters and hang about the pier among the 

holiday yachtsmen - that's fame, that's glory - and nobody can tae 

it away."





At Saranac ae the Stevensons lived in a "wind-beleaguered hill-

top hat-box of a house," which suited the invalid, but, on the 

other hand, invalided his wife.  Soon after getting there he 

plunged into TH MASTR  AATRA.





"o thought have I now apart from it, and I have got along up to 

page ninety-two of the draught with great interest.  It is to me a 

most seiing tale  there are some fantastic elements, the most is 

a dead genuine human problem - human tragedy, I should say rather.  

It will be about as long, I imagine, as IDAD. . . . I have 

done most of the big wor, the quarrel, duel between the brothers, 

and the announcement of the death to Clementina and my ord - 

Clementina, Henry, and Macellar (nicnamed Squaretoes) are really 

very fine fellows the Master is all I now of the devil I have 

nown hints of him, in the world, but always cowards  he is as 

bold as a lion, but with the same deadly, causeless duplicity I 

have watched with so much surprise in my two cowards.  'Tis true, I 

saw a hint of the same nature in another man who was not a coward 

but he had other things to attend to the Master has nothing else 

but his devilry."





His wife grows seriously ill, and Stevenson has to turn to 

household wor.





"loyd and I get breafast I have now, 1.15, ust got the dishes 

washed and the itchen all clean, and sit down to give you as much 

news as I have spirit for, after such an engagement.  lass is a 

thing that really breas my spirit and I do not lie to fail, and 

with glass I cannot reach the wor of my high calling - the 

artist's."





In the midst of such domestic tass and entanglements he writes TH 

MASTR, and very characteristically gets dissatisfied with the last 

parts, "which shame, perhaps degrade, the beginning."



f Mr ipling this is his udgment - in the year 19





"ipling is by far the most promising young man who has appeared 

since - ahem - I appeared.  He amaes me by his precocity and 

various endowments.  ut he alarms me by his copiousness and haste.  

He should shield his fire with both hands, 'and draw up all his 

strength and sweetness in one ball.'  ('Draw all his strength and 

all his sweetness up into one ball'  I cannot remember Marvell's 

words.)  So the critics have been saying to me but I was never 

capable of - and surely never guilty of - such a debauch of 

production.  At this rate his wors will soon fill the habitable 

globe, and surely he was armed for better conflicts than these 

succinct setches and flying leaves of verse  I loo on, I admire, 

I reoice for myself but in a ind of ambition we all have for our 

tongue and literature I am wounded.  If I had this man's fertility 

and courage, it seems to me I could heave a pyramid.



"ell, we begin to be the old fogies now, and it was high time 

SMTHI rose to tae our places.  Certainly ipling has the 

gifts the fairy godmothers were all tipsy at his christening.  

hat will he do with them"





f the rest of Stevenson's career we cannot spea at length, nor is 

it needful.  How in steady succession came his triumphs  came, 

too, his trials from ill-health - how he spent winters at Davos 

lat, ournemouth, and tried other places in America and how, at 

last, good fortune led him to the South acific.  After many 

voyagings and wanderings among the islands, he settled near Apia, 

in Samoa, early in 19, cleared some four hundred acres, and built 

a house where, while he wrote what delighted the nglish-speaing 

race, he too on himself the defence of the natives against foreign 

interlopers, writing under the title A TT T HISTR, the 

most powerful S of the mischief they had done and were doing 

there.  He was the beloved of the natives, as he made himself the 

friend of all with whom he came in contact.  There, as at home, he 

wored - wored with the same determination and in the enoyment of 

better health.  The obtaining idea with him, up to the end, as it 

had been from early life, was a brave, resolute, cheerful endeavour 

to mae the best of it.



"I chose Samoa instead of Honolulu," he told Mr . H. Trigg, who 

reports the tal in CASSS' MAAI, "for the simple and 

eminently satisfactory reason that it is less civilised.  Can you 

not conceive that it is awful fun"  His house was called 

"ailima," which means ive aters in the Samoan, and indicates the 

number of streams that flow by the spot.







CHATR II - TH AIIMA TTRS







TH ailima etters, written to Mr Sidney Colvin and other friends, 

are in their way delightful if not inimitable  and this, in spite 

of the idea having occurred to him, that some use might hereafter 

be made of these letters for publication purposes.  There is, 

indeed, as little trace of any change in the style through this as 

well could be - the utterly familiar, easy, almost child-lie flow 

remains, unmarred by self-consciousness or tendency "to put it on."



In une, 192, Stevenson says





"It came over me the other day suddenly that this diary of mine to 

you would mae good picings after I am dead, and a man could mae 

some ind of a boo out of it, without much trouble.  So for od's 

sae don't lose them, and they will prove a piece of provision for 

'my floor old family,' as Simele calls it."





ut their great charm remains  they are as free and gracious and 

serious and playful and informal as before.  Stevenson's traits of 

character are all here  his largeness of heart, his delicacy, his 

sympathy, his fun, his pathos, his boylie frolicsomeness, his fine 

courage, his love of the sea (for he was by nature a sailor), his 

passion for action and adventure despite his ill-health, his great 

patience with others and fine adaptability to their temper (he says 

that he never gets out of temper with those he has to do with), his 

unbounded, big-hearted hopefulness, and fine perseverance in face 

of difficulties.  hat could be better than the way in which he 

tells that in anuary, 192, when he had a bout of influena and 

was dictating ST IS to his stepdaughter, Mrs Strong, he was 

"reduced to dictating to her in the deaf-and-dumb alphabet" - and 

goes on





"The amanuensis has her head quite turned, and believes herself to 

be the author of this novel [AD IS T SM TT. - A.M.] and as 

the creature () has not been wholly useless in the matter [I TD 

 S - A.M.] I propose to foster her vanity by a little 

commemoration gift . . . I shall tell you on some other occasion, 

and when the A.M. is out of hearing, how R much I propose to 

invest in this testimonial but I may as well inform you at once 

that I intend it to be cheap, sir - damned cheap  My idea of 

running amanuenses is by praise, not pudding, flattery, and not 

coins."





Truly, a rare and rich nature which could thus draw sunshine out of 

its trials - which, by aid of the true philosopher's stone of 

cheerfulness and courage, could transmute the heavy dust and clay 

to gold.



His interests are so wide that he is sometimes pulled in different 

and conflicting directions, as in the contest between his desire to 

aid Mataafa and the other chiefs, and his literary wor - between 

letters to the TIMS about Samoan politics, and, say, DAID 

AR.  Here is a characteristic bit in that strain





"I have a good dose of the devil in my pipestem atomy I have had 

my little holiday outing in my ic at TH  CHAIR, and I 

guess I can settle to DAID AR, to-morrow or riday lie a 

little man.  I wonder if any one had ever more energy upon so 

little strength  I now there is a frost . . . but I mean to 

brea that frost inside two years, and pull off a big success, and 

anity whispers in my ear that I have the strength.  If I haven't, 

whistle owre the lave o't  I can do without glory, and perhaps the 

time is not far off when I can do without corn.  It is a time 

coming soon enough, anyway and I have endured some two and forty 

years without public shame, and had a good time as I did it.  If 

only I could secure a violent death, what a fine success  I wish 

to die in my boots no more and of Counterpane for me.  To be 

drowned, to be shot, to be thrown from a horse - ay, to be hanged, 

rather than pass again through that slow dissolution."





He would not consent to act the invalid unless the spring ran down 

altogether was een for exercise and for mixing among men - his 

native servants if no others were near by.  Here is a bit of 

confession and casuistry quite A A Stevenson





"To come down covered with mud and drenched with sweat and rain 

after some hours in the bush, change, rub down, and tae a chair in 

the verandah, is to taste a quiet conscience.  And the strange 

thing that I mar is this  If I go out and mae sixpence, bossing 

my labourers and plying the cutlass or the spade, idiot conscience 

applauds me if I sit in the house and mae twenty pounds, idiot 

conscience wails over my neglect and the day wasted."





His relish for companionship is indeed strong.  At one place he 

says





"od nows I don't care who I chum with perhaps I lie sailors 

best, but to go round and sue and snea to eep a crowd together - 

never"





If Stevenson's natural bent was to be an explorer, a mountain-

climber, or a sailor - to sail wide seas, or to range on mountain-

tops to gain free and extensive views - yet he inclines well to 

farmer wor, and indeed, has to confess it has a rare attraction 

for him.





"I went cray over outdoor wor," he says at one place, "and had at 

last to confine myself to the house, or literature must have gone 

by the board.  THI is so interesting as weeding, clearing, and 

path-maing  the oversight of labourers becomes a disease.  It is 

quite an effort not to drop into the farmer and it does mae you 

feel so well."





The odd ways of these Samoans, their pride of position, their 

vices, their virtues, their vanities, their small thefts, their 

trics, their delightful ISCIAC sometimes, all amused him.  He 

found in them a fine field of study and observation - a source of 

fun and fund of humanity - as this bit about the theft of some 

piglings will sufficiently prove





"ast night three piglings were stolen from one of our pig-pens.  

The great afaele appeared to my wife uneasy, so she engaged him in 

conversation on the subect, and played upon him the following 

engaging tric  ou advance your two forefingers towards the 

sitter's eyes he closes them, whereupon you substitute (on his 

eyelids) the fore and middle fingers of the left hand, and with 

your right (which he supposes engaged) you tap him on the head and 

bac.  hen you let him open his eyes, he sees you withdrawing the 

two forefingers.  'hat that' ased afaele.  'My devil,' says 

anny.  'I wae um, my devil.  All right now.  He go catch the man 

that catch my pig.'  About an hour afterwards afaele came for 

further particulars.  'h, all right,' my wife says.  'y-and-by 

that man be sleep, devil go sleep same place.  y-and-by that man 

plenty sic.  I no care.  hat for he tae my pig'  afaele cares 

plenty I don't thin he is the man, though he may be but he nows 

him, and most liely will eat some of that pig to-night.  He will 

not eat with relish.'"





et in spite of this R. . Stevenson declares that





"They are a perfectly honest people  nothing of value has ever 

been taen from our house, where doors and windows are always wide 

open and upon one occasion when white ants attaced the silver 

chest, the whole of my family treasure lay spread upon the floor of 

the hall for two days unguarded."





Here is a bit on a wor of peace, a reflection on a day's weeding 

at ailima - in its way almost as touching as any





"I wonder if any one had ever the same attitude to ature as I 

hold, and have held for so long  This business fascinates me lie 

a tune or a passion yet all the while I thrill with a strong 

distaste.  The horror of the thing, obective and subective, is 

always present to my mind the horror of creeping things, a 

superstitious horror of the void and the powers about me, the 

horror of my own devastation and continual murders.  The life of 

the plants comes through my finger-tips, their struggles go to my 

heart lie supplications.  I feel myself blood-boltered then I 

loo bac on my cleared grass, and count myself an ally in a fair 

quarrel, and mae stout my heart."





Here, again, is the way in which he celebrates an act of friendly 

indness on the part of Mr osse





"M DAR SS, - our letter was to me such a bright spot that I 

answer it right away to the preudice of other correspondents or - 

dants (don't now how to spell it) who have prior claims. . . . It 

is the history of our indnesses that alone maes this world 

tolerable.  If it were not for that, for the effect of ind words, 

ind loos, ind letters, multiplying, spreading, maing one happy 

through another and bringing forth benefits, some thirty, some 

fifty, some a thousandfold, I should be tempted to thin our life a 

practical est in the worst possible spirit.  So your four pages 

have confirmed my philosophy as well as consoled my heart in these 

ill hours."







CHATR III - R  ATR ARS







MR HAMMRT, in his STSIAA (pp. 323-4), has given the 

humorous inscriptions on the volumes of his wors which Stevenson 

presented to Dr Trudeau, who attended him when he was in Saranac in 

1- - very characteristic in every way, and showing fully 

Stevenson's fine appreciation of any attention or service.  n the 

DR  AD MR HD volume he wrote





"Trudeau was all the winter at my side

I never saw the nose of Mr Hyde."





And on IDAD is this





"Here is the one sound page of all my writing,

The one I'm proud of and that I delight in."





Stevenson was exquisite in this class of efforts, and were they all 

collected they would form indeed, a fine supplement and 

illustration of the leading lesson of his essays - the true art of 

pleasing others, and of truly pleasing one's self at the same time.  

To my thining the finest of all in this line is the legal () deed 

by which he conveyed his birthday to little Miss Annie Ide, the 

daughter of Mr H. C. Ide, a well-nown American, who was for 

several years a resident of polo, in Samoa, first as and 

Commissioner, and later as Chief ustice under the oint 

appointment of ngland, ermany, and the nited States.  hile 

living at Apia, Mr Ide and his family were very intimate with the 

family of R. . Stevenson.  ittle Annie was a special pet and 

protege of Stevenson and his wife.  After the return of the Ides to 

their American home, Stevenson "deeded" to Annie his birthday in 

the following unique document





I, RRT IS STS, advocate of the Scots ar, author of TH 

MASTR  AATRA and MRA MMS, civil engineer, sole owner 

and patentee of the palace and plantation nown as ailima, in the 

island of polo, Samoa, a ritish subect, being in sound mind, and 

pretty well, I than you, in mind and body



In consideration that Miss Annie H. Ide, daughter of H. C. Ide, in 

the town of Saint ohnsbury, in the County of Caledonia, in the 

State of ermont, nited States of America, was born, out of all 

reason, upon Christmas Day, and is, therefore, out of all ustice, 

denied the consolation and profit of a proper birthday



And considering that I, the said Robert ouis Stevenson, have 

attained the age when we never mention it, and that I have now no 

further use for a birthday of any description



And in consideration that I have met H. C. Ide, the father of the 

said Annie H. Ide, and found him as white a land commissioner as I 

require, I have transferred, and do hereby transfer, to the said 

Annie H. Ide, all and whole of my rights and privileges in the 13th 

day of ovember, formerly my birthday, now, hereby and henceforth, 

the birthday of the said Annie H. Ide, to have, hold, exercise, and 

enoy the same in the customary manner, by the sporting of fine 

raiment, eating of rich meats, and receipt of gifts, compliments, 

and copies of verse, according to the manner of our ancestors



And I direct the said Annie H. Ide to add to the said name of Annie 

H. Ide the name of ouisa - at least in private - and I charge her 

to use my said birthday with moderation and humanity, T TAMAM 

A IIA AMIIAS, the said birthday not being so young as it 

once was and having carried me in a very satisfactory manner since 

I can remember



And in case the said Annie H. Ide shall neglect or contravene 

either of the above conditions, I hereby revoe the donation and 

transfer my rights in the said birthday to the resident of the 

nited States of America for the time being.



In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and seal this 19th day 

of une, in the year of grace eighteen hundred and ninety-one.



RRT IS STS. [Seal.]

ITSS, D SR.

ITSS, HARD ATTS.





He died in Samoa in December 194 - not from phthisis or anything 

directly connected with it, but from the bursting of a blood-vessel 

and suffusion of blood on the brain.  He had up to the moment 

almost of his sudden and unexpected death been busy on IR  

HRMIST and ST IS, which he left unfinished - the latter having 

been brought to a conclusion by Mr uiller-Couch.







CHATR I - SM CHARACTRISTICS







I Stevenson we lost one of the most powerful writers of our day, 

as well as the most varied in theme and style.  hen I use the word 

"powerful," I do not mean merely the producing of the most striing 

or sensational results, nor the facility of weaving a fascinating 

or blood-curdling plot I mean the writer who seemed always to have 

most in reserve - a secret fund of power and fascination which 

always pointed beyond the printed page, and set before the 

attentive and careful reader a strange but fascinating RSAIT.  

ther authors have done that in measure.  There was Hawthorne, 

behind whose writings there is always the wistful, cold, far-

withdrawn spectator of human nature - eerie, inquisitive, and, I 

had almost said, inquisitorial - a little bloodless, eerie, weird, 

and cobwebby.  There was Dr endell Holmes, with his problems of 

heredity, of race-mixture and weird inoculation, as in SI R 

and TH ARDIA A, and there were oe and Charles hitehead.  

Stevenson, in a few of his writings - in one of the MRR M 

chapters and in DR  AD MR HD, and, to some extent, in TH 

MASTR  AATRA - showed that he could enter on the obscure 

and, in a sense, weird and metaphysical elements in human life 

though always there was, too, a touch at least of gloomy 

suggestion, from which, as it seemed, he could not there wholly 

escape.  ut always, too, there was a touch that suggests the 

universal.



ven in the stories that would be classed as those of incident and 

adventure merely, TRASR ISAD, IDAD, and the rest, there 

is a sense as of some unaffected but fine symbolism that somehow 

touches something of possibility in yourself as you read.  The 

simplest narrative from his hand proclaimed itself a deep study in 

human nature - its motives tendencies, and possibilities.  In these 

stories there is promise at once of the most realistic imagination, 

the most fantastic romance, een insights into some sides of human 

nature, and weird fancies, as well as the most delicate and dainty 

pictures of character.  And this is precisely what we have - always 

with a vein of the finest autobiography - a ind of select and 

indirect self-revelation - often with a touch of quaintness, a 

subdued humour, and sweet-blooded vagary, if we may be allowed the 

word, which mae you feel towards the writer as towards a friend.  

He was too much an artist to overdo this, and his strength lies 

there, that generally he suggests and turns away at the right 

point, with a smile, as you as for MR.  oo how he sets, half 

slyly, these words into the mouth of David alfour on his first 

meeting with Catriona in one of the steep wynds or closes off the 

High Street of dinburgh





"There is no greater wonder than the way the face of a young woman 

fits in a man's mind, and stays there, and he never could tell you 

why  it ust seems it was the thing he wanted."





Tae this alongside of his remar made to his mother while still a 

youth - "that he did not care to understand the strain on a bridge" 

(when he tried to study engineering) what he wanted was something 

with human nature in it.  His style, in his essays, etc., where he 

writes in his own person, is most polished, full of phrases finely 

drawn when he speas through others, as in IDAD and DAID 

AR, it is still fine and effective, and generally it is fairly 

true to the character, with cunning glimpses, nevertheless, of his 

own temper and feeling too.  He maes us feel his confidants and 

friends, as has been said.  ne could almost construct a biography 

from his essays and his novels - the one would give us the facts of 

his life suffused with fancy and ideal colour, humour and fine 

observation not wanting the other would give us the history of his 

mental and moral being and development, and of the traits and 

determinations which he drew from along a lengthened line of 

progenitors.  How characteristic it is of him - a man who for so 

many years suffered as an invalid - that he should lay it down that 

the two great virtues, including all others, were cheerfulness and 

delight in labour.



ne writer has very well said on this feature in Stevenson





"ther authors have struggled bravely against physical weaness, 

but their wor has not usually been of a creative order, dependent 

for its success on high animal spirits.  They have written 

histories, essays, contemplative or didactic poems, wors which may 

more or less be regarded as 'dull narcotics numbing pain.'  ut 

who, in so fragile a frame as Robert ouis Stevenson's, has 

retained such indomitable elasticity, such fertility of invention, 

such unflagging energy, not merely to collect and arrange, but to 

proect and body forth  Has any true 'maer' been such an 

incessant sufferer  rom his childhood, as he himself said apropos 

of the CHID'S ARD, he could 'spea with less authority of 

gardens than of that other "land of counterpane."'  There were, 

indeed, a few years of adolescence during which his health was 

tolerable, but they were years of apprenticeship to life and art 

('pioching,' as he called it), not of serious production.  Though 

he was a precocious child, his genius ripened slowly, and it was 

ust reaching maturity when the 'wolverine,' as he called his 

disease, fixed its fangs in his flesh.  rom that time forward not 

only did he live with death at his elbow in an almost literal sense 

(he used to carry his left arm in a sling lest a too sudden 

movement should bring on a haemorrhage), but he had ever-recurring 

intervals of wees and months during which he was totally unfit for 

wor while even at the best of times he had to husband his 

strength most ealously.  Add to all this that he was a slow and 

laborious writer, who would tae more pains with a phrase than 

Scott with a chapter - then loo at the stately shelf of his wors, 

brimful of impulse, initiative, and the oy of life, and say 

whether it be an exaggeration to call his tenacity and fortitude 

unique"





Samoa, with its fine climate, prolonged his life - we had fain 

hoped that in that air he found so favourable he might have lived 

for many years, to add to the precious stoc of innocent delight he 

has given to the world - to do yet more and greater.  It was not to 

be.  They buried him, with full native honours as to a chief, on 

the top of aea mountain, 13 feet high - a road for the coffin to 

pass being cut through the woods on the slopes of the hill.  There 

he has a resting-place not all unfit - for he sought the pure and 

clearer air on the heights from whence there are widest prospects 

yet not in the spot he would have chosen - for his heart was at 

home, and not very long before his death he sang, surely with 

pathetic reference now





"Spring shall come, come again, calling up the moorfowl,

Spring shall bring the sun and rain, bring the bees and flowers,

Red shall the heather bloom over hill and valley,

Soft flow the stream thro' the even-flowing hours

air the day shine, as it shone upon my childhood -

air shine the day on the house with open door

irds come and cry there, and twitter in the chimney -

ut I go for ever and come again no more."







CHATR  - A SAMA MMRIA  R. . STS







A  wees after his death, the mail from Samoa, brought to 

Stevenson's friends, myself among the number, a precious, if 

pathetic, memorial of the master.  It is in the form of "A etter 

to Mr Stevenson's riends," by his stepson, Mr loyd sbourne, and 

bears the motto from alt hitman, "I have been waiting for you 

these many years.  ive me your hand and welcome."  Mr sbourne 

gives a full account of the last hours.





"He wrote hard all that morning of the last day his half-finished 

boo, HRMIST, he udged the best he had ever written, and the 

sense of successful effort made him buoyant and happy as nothing 

else could.  In the afternoon the mail fell to be answered - not 

business correspondence, for this was left till later - but replies 

to the long, indly letters of distant friends received but two 

days since, and still bright in memory.  At sunset he came 

downstairs rallied his wife about the forebodings she could not 

shae off taled of a lecturing tour to America that he was eager 

to mae, 'as he was now so well' and played a game of cards with 

her to drive away her melancholy.  He said he was hungry begged 

her assistance to help him mae a salad for the evening meal and, 

to enhance the little feast he brought up a bottle of old urgundy 

from the cellar.  He was helping his wife on the verandah, and 

gaily taling, when suddenly he put both hands to his head and 

cried out, 'hat's that'  Then he ased quicly, 'Do I loo 

strange'  ven as he did so he fell on his nees beside her.  He 

was helped into the great hall, between his wife and his body-

servant, Sosimo, losing consciousness instantly as he lay bac in 

the armchair that had once been his grandfather's.  ittle time was 

lost in bringing the doctors - Anderson of the man-of-war, and his 

friend, Dr un.  They looed at him and shoo their heads they 

laboured strenuously, and left nothing undone.  ut he had passed 

the bounds of human sill.  He had grown so well and strong, that 

his wasted lungs were unable to bear the stress of returning 

health."





Then 'tis told how the Rev. Mr Clare came and prayed by him and 

how, soon after, the chiefs were summoned, and came, bringing their 

fine mats, which, laid on the body, almost hid the nion ac in 

which it had been wrapped.  ne of the old Mataafa chiefs, who had 

been in prison, and who had been one of those who wored on the 

maing of the "Road of the oving Heart" (the road of gratitude 

which the chiefs had made up to Mr Stevenson's house as a mar of 

their appreciation of his efforts on their behalf), came and 

crouched beside the body and said





"I am only a poor Samoan, and ignorant.  thers are rich, and can 

give Tusitala () the parting presents of rich, fine mats I am 

poor, and can give nothing this last day he receives his friends.  

et I am not afraid to come and loo the last time in my friend's 

face, never to see him more till we meet with od.  ehold  

Tusitala is dead Mataafa is also dead.  These two great friends 

have been taen by od.  hen Mataafa was taen, who was our 

support but Tusitala  e were in prison, and he cared for us.  e 

were sic, and he made us well.  e were hungry, and he fed us.  

The day was no longer than his indness.  ou are great people, and 

full of love.  et who among you is so great as Tusitala  hat is 

your love to his love  ur clan was Mataafa's clan, for whom I 

spea this day therein was Tusitala also.  e mourn them both."



A select company of Samoans would not be deterred, and watched by 

the body all night, chanting songs, with bits of Catholic prayers 

and in the morning the wor began of clearing a path through the 

wood on the hill to the spot on the crown where Mr Stevenson had 

expressed a wish to be buried.  The following prayer, which Mr 

Stevenson had written and read aloud to his family only the night 

before, was read by Mr Clare in the service





"e beseech thee, ord, to behold us with favour, fol of many 

families and nations, gathered together in the peace of this roof 

wea men and women, subsisting under the covert of Thy patience.  

e patient still suffer us yet a while longer - with our broen 

purposes of good, with our idle endeavours against evil - suffer us 

a while longer to endure, and (if it may be) help us to do better.  

less to us our extraordinary mercies if the day come when these 

must be taen, have us play the man under affliction.  e with our 

friends be with ourselves.  o with each of us to rest  if any 

awae, temper to them the dar hours of watching and when the day 

returns to us, our Sun and Comforter, call us up with morning faces 

and with morning hearts - eager to labour - eager to be happy, if 

happiness shall be our portion and if the day be mared for 

sorrow, strong to endure it.



"e than Thee and praise Thee, and in the words of Him to whom 

this day is sacred, close our oblations."





Mr aet M. Haggard, H..M., and-Commissioner, tells, by way of 

reminiscence, the story of "The Road of ood Heart," how it came to 

be built, and of the great feast Mr Stevenson gave at the close of 

the wor, at which, in the course of his speech, he said





"ou are all aware in some degree of what has happened.  ou now 

those chiefs to have been prisoners you perhaps now that during 

the term of their confinement I had it in my power to do them 

certain favours.  ne thing some of you cannot now, that they were 

immediately repaid by answering attentions.  They were liberated by 

the new Administration. . . .  As soon as they were free men - 

owing no man anything - instead of going home to their own places 

and families, they came to me.  They offered to do this wor (to 

mae this road) for me as a free gift, without hire, without 

supplies, and I was tempted at first to refuse their offer.  I new 

the country to be poor I new famine threatening I new their 

families long disorganised for want of supervision.  et I 

accepted, because I thought the lesson of that road might be more 

useful to Samoa than a thousand bread-fruit trees, and because to 

myself it was an exquisite pleasure to receive that which was so 

handsomely offered.  It is now done you have trod it to-day in 

coming hither.  It has been made for me by chiefs some of them 

old, some sic, all newly delivered from a harassing confinement, 

and in spite of weather unusually hot and insalubrious.  I have 

seen these chiefs labour valiantly with their own hands upon the 

wor, and I have set up over it, now that it is finished the name 

of 'The Road of ratitude' (the road of loving hearts), and the 

names of those that built it.  'In perpetuam memoriam,' we say, and 

spea idly.  At least, as long as my own life shall be spared it 

shall be here perpetuated partly for my pleasure and in my 

gratitude partly for others continually to publish the lesson of 

this road."





And turning to the chiefs, Mr Stevenson said





"I will tell you, chiefs, that when I saw you woring on that road, 

my heart grew warm not with gratitude only, but with hope.  It 

seemed to me that I read the promise of something good for Samoa 

it seemed to me as I looed at you that you were a company of 

warriors in a battle, fighting for the defence of our common 

country against all aggression.  or there is a time to fight and a 

time to dig.  ou Samoans may fight, you may conquer twenty times, 

and thirty times, and all will be in vain.  There is but one way to 

defend Samoa.  Hear it, before it is too late.  It is to mae roads 

and gardens, and care for your trees, and sell their produce 

wisely and, in one word, to occupy and use your country.  If you 

do not, others will. . . .



"I love Samoa and her people.  I love the land.  I have chosen it 

to be my home while I live, and my grave after I am dead, and I 

love the people, and have chosen them to be my people, to live and 

die with.  And I see that the day is come now of the great battle 

of the great and the last opportunity by which it shall be decided 

whether you are to pass away lie those other races of which I have 

been speaing, or to stand fast and have your children living on 

and honouring your memory in the land you received of your 

fathers."





Mr ames H. Mulligan, .S. Consul, told of the feast of 

Thansgiving Day on the 29th ovember prior to Mr Stevenson's 

death, and how at great pains he had procured for it the necessary 

turey, and how Mrs Stevenson had found a fair substitute for the 

pudding.  In the course of his speech in reply to an unexpected 

proposal of "The Host," Mr Stevenson said





"There on my right sits she who has but lately from our own loved 

native land come bac to me - she to whom, with no lessening of 

affection to those others to whom I cling, I love better than all 

the world besides - my mother.  rom the opposite end of the table, 

my wife, who has been all in all to me, when the days were very 

dar, loos to-night into my eyes - while we have both grown a bit 

older - with undiminished and undiminishing affection.



"Childless, yet on either side of me sits that good woman, my 

daughter, and the stalwart man, my son, and both have been and are 

more than son and daughter to me, and have brought into my life 

mirth and beauty.  or is this all.  There sits the bright boy dear 

to my heart, full of the flow and the spirits of boyhood, so that I 

can even now that for a time at least we have still the voice of a 

child in the house."





Mr A. . Macay gives an account of the funeral and a description 

of the burial-place, ending





"Tofa Tusitala  Sleep peacefully on thy mountain-top, alone in 

ature's sanctity, where the wooddove's note, the moaning of the 

waves as they brea unceasingly on the distant reef, and the 

sighing of the winds in the distant tavai trees chant their 

requiem."





The Rev. Mr Clare tells of the constant and active interest Mr 

Stevenson too in the missionaries and their wor, often aiding 

them by his advice and fine insight into the character of the 

natives and a translation follows of a dirge by one of the chiefs, 

so fine that we must give it





I.



"isten,  this world, as I tell of the disaster

That befell in the late afternoon

That broe lie a wave of the sea

Suddenly and swiftly, blinding our eyes.

Alas for oia who speas tears in his voice



RRAI - roan and weep,  my heart, in its sorrow.

Alas for Tusitala, who rests in the forest

Aimlessly we wait, and sorrowing.  ill he again return

ament,  ailima, waiting and ever waiting

et us search and inquire of the captain of ships,

'e not angry, but has not Tusitala come'



II.



"Teuila, sorrowing one, come thou hither

repare me a letter, and I will carry it.

et her Maesty ictoria be told

That Tusitala, the loving one, has been taen hence.



RRAI - roan and weep,  my heart, etc., etc.



III.



"Alas my heart weeps with anxious grief

As I thin of the days before us

f the white men gathering for the Christmas assembly

Alas for Aolele left in her loneliness,

And the men of ailima, who weep together

Their leader - their leader being taen.



RRAI - roan and weep,  my heart, etc., etc.



I.



"Alas  my heart it weeps unceasingly

hen I thin of his illness

Coming upon him with fatal swiftness.

ould that it waited a glance or a word from him,

r some toen, some toen from us of our love.



RRAI - roan and weep,  my heart, etc., etc.



.



"rieve,  my heart  I cannot bear to loo on

All the chiefs who are there now assembling

Alas, Tusitala Thou art not here

I loo hither and thither in vain for thee.



RRAI - roan and weep,  my heart, etc., etc."





And the little boolet closes with Mr Stevenson's own lines





"RIM.



nder the wide and starry sy,

Dig the grave and let me lie

lad did I live and gladly die,

And I laid me down with a will.

This be the verse you grave for me

'Here he lies where he longed to be

Home is the sailor, home from sea

And the hunter home from the hill.'"





very touch tells here was a man, with heart and head, with soul 

and mind intent on the loftiest things simple, great,





"ie one of the simple great ones gone

or ever and ever by.



His character towered after all far above his boos great and 

beautiful though they were.  Ready for friendship from all 

meanness free.  So, too, the Samoans felt.  This, surely, was what 

oethe meant when he wrote





"The clear head and stout heart,

However far they roam,

et in every truth have part,

Are everywhere at home."





His manliness, his width of sympathy, his practicality, his range 

of interests were in nothing more seen than in his contributions to 

the history of Samoa, as specially exhibited in A TT T 

HISTR and his letters to the TIMS.  He was, on this side, in no 

sense a dreamer, but a man of acute observation and quic eye for 

passing events and the characters that were in them with sympathy 

equal to his discernments.  His portraits of certain ermans and 

others in these writings, and his power of tracing effects to 

remote and underlying causes, show sufficiently what he might have 

done in the field of history, had not higher voices called him.  

His adaptation to the life in Samoa, and his assumption of the 

semi-patriarchal character in his own sphere there, were only 

toens of the presence of the same traits as have ust been dwelt 

on.







CHATR I - MISS STS' RCRD  A IRIMA







MRS STR, in her chapter of TA TA I MMRIS  AIIMA, 

tells a story of the natives' love for Stevenson.  "The other day 

the coo was away," she writes, "and ouis, who was busy writing, 

too his meals in his room.  nowing there was no one to coo his 

lunch, he told Sosimo to bring him some bread and cheese.  To his 

surprise he was served with an excellent meal - an omelette, a good 

salad, and perfect coffee.  'ho cooed this' ased ouis in 

Samoan.  'I did,' said Sosimo.  'ell,' said ouis, 'great is your 

wisdom.'  Sosimo bowed and corrected him - 'reat is my love'"



Miss Stubbs, in her STS'S SHRI TH RCRD  A IRIMA, 

illustrates the same devotion.  n the top of Mount aea, she 

writes, is the massive sarcophagus, "not an ideal structure by any 

means, not even beautiful, and yet in its massive ruggedness it 

somehow suited the man and the place."



"The wind sighed softly in the branches of the 'Tavau' trees, from 

out the green recesses of the 'Toi' came the plaintive coo of the 

wood-pigeon.  In and out of the branches of the magnificent 'au' 

tree, which overhangs the grave, a ing-fisher, sea-blue, 

iridescent, flitted to and fro, whilst a scarlet hibiscus, in full 

flower, showed up royally against the gray lichened cement.  All 

around was light and life and colour, and I said to myself, 'He is 

made one with nature' he is now, body and soul and spirit, 

commingled with the loveliness around.  He who longed in life to 

scale the height, he who attained his wish only in death, has 

become in himself a parable of fulfilment.  o need now for that 

heart-sic cry-





"'Sing me a song of a lad that is gone,

Say, could that lad be I'





o need now for the despairing finality of





"'I have trod the upward and the downward slope,

I have endured and done in the days of yore,

I have longed for all, and bid farewell to hope,

And I have lived, and loved, and closed the door.'





"Death has set his seal of peace on the unequal conflict of mind 

and matter the All-Mother has gathered him to herself.



"In years to come, when his grave is perchance forgotten, a rugged 

ruin, home of the liard and the bat, Tusitala - the story-teller - 

'the man with a heart of gold' (as I so often heard him designated 

in the Islands), will live, when it may be his tales have ceased to 

interest, in the tender remembrance of those whose lives he 

beautified, and whose hearts he warmed into gratitude."



The chiefs have prohibited the use of firearms or other weapons on 

Mount aea, "in order that the birds may live there undisturbed and 

unafraid, and build their nests in the trees around Tusitala's 

grave."



Miss Stubbs has many records of the impression produced on those he 

came in contact with in Samoa - white men and women as well as 

natives.  She met a certain Austrian Count, who adored Stevenson's 

memory.  ver his camp bed was a framed photograph of R. . 

Stevenson.





"So," he said, "I eep him there, for he was my saviour, and I wish 

'good-night' and 'good-morning,' every day, both to himself and to 

his old home."  The Count then told us that when he was stopping at 

ailima he used to have his bath daily on the verandah below his 

room.  ne lovely morning he got up very early, got into the bath, 

and splashed and sang, feeling very well and very happy, and at 

last beginning to sing very loudly, he forgot Mr Stevenson 

altogether.  All at once there was Stevenson himself, his hair all 

ruffled up, his eyes full of anger.  "Man," he said, "you and your 

infernal row have cost me more than two hundred pounds in ideas," 

and with that he was gone, but he did not address the Count again 

the whole of that day.  ext morning he had forgotten the Count's 

offence and was ust as friendly as ever, but - the noise was never 

repeated





Another of the Count's stories greatly amused the visitors





"An nglish lord came all the way to Samoa in his yacht to see Mr 

Stevenson, and found him in his cool imino sitting with the 

ladies, and drining tea on his verandah the whole party had their 

feet bare.  The nglish lord thought that he must have called at 

the wrong time, and offered to go away, but Mr Stevenson called out 

to him, and brought him bac, and made him stay to dinner.  They 

all went away to dress, and the guest was left sitting alone in the 

verandah.  Soon they came bac, Mr sbourne and Mr Stevenson 

wearing the form of dress most usual in that hot climate a white 

mess acet, and white trousers, but their feet were still bare.  

The guest put up his eyeglass and stared for a bit, then he looed 

down upon his own beautifully shod feet, and sighed.  They all 

taled and laughed until the ladies came in, the ladies in sil 

dresses, befrilled with lace, but still with bare feet, and the 

guest too a covert loo through his eyeglass and gasped, but when 

he noticed that there were gold bangles on Mrs Strong's anles and 

rings upon her toes, he could bear no more and dropped his eyeglass 

on the ground of the verandah breaing it all to bits."





Miss Stubbs met on the other side of the island a photographer who 

told her this





"I had but recently come to Samoa," he said, "and was standing one 

day in my shop when Mr Stevenson came in and spoe.  'Man,' he 

said, 'I ta ye to be a Scotsman lie mysel'.'



"I would I could have claimed a inship," deplored the 

photographer, "but, alas  I am nglish to the bacbone, with never 

a drop of Scotch blood in my veins, and I told him this, regretting 

the absence of the blood tie."



"'I could have sworn your bac was the bac of a Scotsman,' was his 

comment, 'but,' and he held out his hand, 'you loo sic, and there 

is a fellowship in sicness not to be denied.' I said I was not 

strong, and had come to the Island on account of my health.  'ell, 

then,' replied Mr Stevenson, 'it shall be my business to help you 

to get well come to ailima whenever you lie, and if I am out, 

as for refreshment, and wait until I come in, you will always find 

a welcome there.'"



At this point my informant turned away, and there was a brea in 

his voice as he exclaimed, "Ah, the years go on, and I don't miss 

him less, but more next to my mother he was the best friend I ever 

had  a man with a heart of gold his house was a second home to 

me."





Stevenson's experience shows how easy it is with a certain type of 

man, to restore the old feudal conditions of service and 

relationship.  Stevenson did this in essentials in Samoa.  He tells 

us how he managed to get good service out of the Samoans (who are 

accredited with great unwillingness to wor) and this he DID by 

firm, but generous, indly, almost brotherly treatment, reviving, 

as it were, a ind of clan life - giving a livery of certain 

colours - symbol of all this.  A little fellow of eight, he tells, 

had been taen into the household, made a pet of by Mrs Strong, his 

stepdaughter, and had had a dress given to him, lie that of the 

men and, when one day he had strolled down by himself as far as 

the hotel, and the master of it, seeing him, called out in Samoan, 

"Hi, youngster, who are you"  The eight-year-old replied, "hy, 

don't you see for yourself  I am one of the ailima men"



The story of the RAD  TH I HART was but another fine 

attestation of it.







CHATR II - HIS IS AD MTHDS







T have created a school of idolaters, who will out and out swear 

by everything, and as though by necessity, at the same time, a 

school of studious detractors, who will suspiciously question 

everything, or throw out suggestions of disparagement, is at all 

events, a proof of greatness, the countersign of undoubted genius, 

and an assurance of lasting fame.  R. . Stevenson has certainly 

secured this.  Time will tell what of virtue there is with either 

party.  or me, who new Stevenson, and loved him, as finding in 

the sweet-tempered, brave, and in some things, most generous man, 

what gave at once tone and elevation to the artist, I would fain 

indicate here my impressions of him and his genius - impressions 

that remain almost wholly uninfluenced by the vast mass of matter 

about him that the press now turns out.  oos, not to spea of 

articles, pour forth about him - about his style, his art, his 

humour and his characters - aye, and even about his religion.



Miss Simpson follows Mr ellyse aildon with the DIRH DAS, 

Miss Moyes lac comes on with her picture in the AMS SCTS, and 

rofessor Raleigh succeeds her Mr raham alfour follows with his 

I Mr elman's volume about his Religion comes next, and that is 

reinforced by more familiar letters and TA TA, by loyd 

sbourne and Mrs Strong, his step-children Mr . Hammerton then 

comes on handily with STSIAA - fruit lovingly gathered from 

many and far fields, and garnered with not a little tact and taste, 

and catholicity Miss aura Stubbs then presents us with her 

touching STS'S SHRI  TH RCRD  A IRIMA and Mr 

Sidney Colvin is now busily at wor on his I  STS, which 

must do not a little to enlighten and to settle many questions.



Curiosity and interest grow as time passes and the places 

connected with Stevenson, hitherto obscure many of them, are now 

touched with light if not with romance, and are nown, by name at 

all events, to every reader of boos.  es every place he lived 

in, or touched at, is worthy of full description if only on account 

of its associations with him.  If there is not a land of Stevenson, 

as there is a land of Scott, or of urns, it is due to the fact 

that he was far-travelled, and in his wors painted many scenes  

but there are at home - dinburgh, and Halerside and Allermuir, 

Caeretton, Swanston, and Colinton, and Maw Moss and Rullion reen 

and Tummel, "the A of Scotland," as he named it to me, and the 

Castletown of raemar - raemar in his view coming a good second to 

Tummel, for starting-points to any curious worshipper who would go 

the round in Scotland and miss nothing.  Mr eddie's wor on TH 

HM CTR  STS may be found very helpful here.



1. It is impossible to separate Stevenson from his wor, because of 

the imperious personal element in it and so I shall not now strive 

to gain the appearance of cleverness by affecting any distinction 

here.  The first thing I would say is, that he was when I new him 

- what pretty much to the end he remained - a youth.  His outloo 

on life was boyishly genial and free, despite all his sufferings 

from ill-health - it was the pride of action, the oy of endurance, 

the revelry of high spirits, and the sense of victory that most 

fascinated him and his theory of life was to tae pleasure and 

give pleasure, without calculation or stint - a ind of boyish 

grace and bounty never to be overcome or disturbed by outer 

accident or change.  If he was sometimes haunted with the thought 

of changes through changed conditions or circumstances, as my very 

old friend, Mr Charles owe, has told even of the College days that 

he was always supposing things to undergo some sea-change into 

something else, if not "into something rich and strange," this was 

but to add to his sense of enoyment, and the power of conferring 

delight, and the luxuries of variety, as boys do when they let 

fancy loose.  And this always had, with him, an individual 

reference or return.  He was thus constantly, and latterly, half-

consciously, trying to interpret himself somehow through all the 

things which engaged him, and which he so transmogrified - things 

that especially attracted him and too his fancy.  Thus, if it must 

be confessed, that even in his highest moments, there lingers a 

touch - if no more than a touch - of self-consciousness which will 

not allow him to forget manner in matter, it is also true that he 

is cunningly conveying traits in himself and the sense of this is 

often at the root of his sweet, gentle, naive humour.  There is, 

therefore, some truth in the criticisms which assert that even 

"long ohn Silver," that fine pirate, with his one leg, was, after 

all, a shadow of Stevenson himself - the genial buccaneer who did 

his tremendous murdering with a smile on his face was but Stevenson 

thrown into new circumstances, or, as one has said, Stevenson-cum-

Henley, so thrown as was also Archer in IR  HRMIST, and more 

than this, that his most successful women-fol - lie Miss rant 

and Catriona - are studies of himself, and that in all his heroes, 

and even heroines, was an unmistaable touch of R. . Stevenson.  

ven Mr aildon rather maladroitly admits that in Miss rant, the 

ord Advocate's daughter, THR IS A D DA  TH ATHR 

HIMS DISISD I TTICATS.  I have thought of Stevenson in 

many suits, beside that which included the velvet acet, but - 

petticoats



outh is autocratic, and can show a grand indifferency  it goes 

for what it lies, and ignores all else - it fondly magnifies its 

favourites, and, after all, to a great extent, it is but analysing, 

dealing with and presenting itself to us, if we only watch well.  

This is the secret of all prevailing romance  it is the secret of 

all stories of adventure and chivalry of the simpler and more 

primitive order and in one aspect it is true that R. . Stevenson 

loved and clung to the primitive and elemental, if it may not be 

said, as one distinguished writer has said, that he even loved 

savagery in itself.  ut hardly could it be seriously held, as Mr 

I. angwill held





"That women did not cut any figure in his boos springs from this 

same interest in the elemental.  omen are not born, but made.  

They are a social product of infinite complexity and delicacy.  or 

a lie reason Stevenson was no interpreter of the modern.... A 

child to the end, always playing at 'mae-believe,' dying young, as 

those whom the gods love, and, as he would have died had he 

achieved his centenary, he was the natural exponent in literature 

of the child."





ut there were subtly qualifying elements beyond what Mr angwill 

here recognises and reinforces.  That is ust about as correct and 

true as this other deliverance





"His Scotch romances have been as over-praised by the ealous 

Scotsmen who cry 'genius' at the sight of a ilt, and who lose 

their heads at a waft from the heather, as his other boos have 

been under-praised.  The best of all, TH MASTR  AATRA, 

ends in a bog and where the author aspires to exceptional subtlety 

of character-drawing he befogs us or himself altogether.  e are so 

long weighing the brothers allantrae in the balance, watching it 

incline now this way, now that, scrupulously removing a particle of 

our sympathy from the one brother to the other, to restore it again 

in the next chapter, that we end with a conception of them as 

confusing as Mr ilbert's conception of Hamlet, who was idiotically 

sane with lucid intervals of lunacy."





If Stevenson was, as Mr angwill holds, "the child to the end," and 

the child only, then if we may not say what Carlyle said of De 

uincey  "CCI, that child has been in hell," we may say, 

"CCI, that child has been in unchildlie haunts, and can't 

forget the memory of them."  In a sense every romancer is a child - 

such was udwig Tiec, such was Scott, such was ames Hogg, the 

ttric Shepherd.  ut each is something more - he has been touched 

with the wand of a fairy, and nows, at least, some of lfin and 

as well as of childhood's home.



The sense of Stevenson's youthfulness seems to have struc every 

one who had intimacy with him.  Mr aildon writes (p. 21 of his 

boo)





"I would now give much to possess but one of Stevenson's gifts - 

namely, that extraordinary vividness of recollection by which he 

could so astonishingly recall, not only the doings, but the very 

thoughts and emotions of his youth.  or, often as we must have 

communed together, with all the shameless candour of boys, hardly 

any remar has stuc to me except the opinion already alluded to, 

which struc me - his elder by some fifteen months - as very 

amusing, that at sixteen 'we should be men.'  H  A MRTAS, 

H AS, I A SS, AAS STI A "





Mr osse tells us





"He had retained a great deal of the temperament of a child, and it 

was his philosophy to encourage it.  In his dreary passages of bed, 

when his illness was more than commonly heavy on him, he used to 

contrive little amusements for himself.  He played on the flute, or 

he modelled little groups and figures in clay."





2. ne of the qualifying elements unnoted by Mr angwill is simply 

this, that R. . Stevenson never lost the strange tint imparted to 

his youth by the religious influences to which he was subect, and 

which left their impress and colour on him and all that he did.  

Henley, in his striing sonnet, hit it when he wrote





"A deal of Ariel, ust a strea of uc,

Much Antony, of Hamlet most of all,

AD SMTHI  TH SHRTR CATCHIST."





SMTHI he was a great deal of Shorter Catechist  Scotch 

Calvinism, its metaphysic, and all the strange whims, perversities, 

and questionings of "ate, free-will, forenowledge absolute," 

which it inevitably awaens, was much with him - the sense of 

reprobation and the gloom born of it, as well as the abounding oy 

in the sense of the elect - the Covenanters and their wild 

resolutions, the moss-troopers and their dare-devilries - entland 

Risings and fights of Rullion reen he not only never forgot them, 

but they mixed themselves as in his very breath of life, and made 

him a great questioner.  How would I have borne myself in this or 

in that  Supposing I had been there, how would it have been - the 

same, or different from what it was with those that were there  

His wor is throughout at bottom a series of problems that almost 

all trace to this root, directly or indirectly.  "There, but for 

the grace of od, goes ohn radford," said the famous uritan on 

seeing a felon led to execution so with Stevenson.  Hence his 

fondness for tramps, for scamps (he even bestowed special attention 

and pains on illon, the poet-scamp) he was rather impatient with 

poor Thoreau, because he was a purist solitary, and had too little 

of vice, and, as Stevenson held, narrow in sympathy, and too self-

satisfied, and bent only on self-improvement.  He held a brief for 

the honest villain, and leaned to him brotherly.  ven the 

anecdotes he most pries have a fine loo this way - a hunger for 

completion in achievement, even in the violation of fine humane 

feeling or morality, and all the time a sense of submission to 

od's will.  "Doctor," said the dying gravedigger in D MRTAIT, 

"I hae laid three hunner an' fower score in that iryaird, an' had 

it been His wull," indicating Heaven, "I wad hae lieit weel to hae 

made oot the fower hunner."  That too Stevenson.  isten to what 

Mr dmond osse tells of his tal, when he found him in a private 

hotel in insbury Circus, ondon, ready to be put on board a 

steamer for America, on 21st August, 1





"It was church time, and there was some tal of my witnessing his 

will, which I could not do because there could be found no other 

reputable witness, the whole crew of the hotel being at church.  

'This,' he said, 'is the way in which our valuable city hotels - 

paced no doubt with gems and ewellery - are deserted on a Sunday 

morning.  Some bold piratical fellow, defying the spirit of 

Sabbatarianism, might mae a handsome revenue by sacing the 

derelict hotels between the hours of ten and twelve.  ne hotel a 

wee would enable such a man to retire in course of a year.  A mas 

might perhaps be worn for the mere fancy of the thing, and to 

terrify itchen-maids, but no real disguise would be needful.'"





I would rather agree with Mr Chesterton than with Mr angwill here





"Stevenson's enormous capacity for oy flowed directly out of his 

profoundly religious temperament.  He conceived himself as an 

unimportant guest at one eternal and uproarious banquet, and 

instead of grumbling at the soup, he accepted it with careless 

gratitude. . . . His gaiety was neither the gaiety of the pagan, 

nor the gaiety of the  IAT.  It was the greater gaiety of the 

mystic.  He could enoy trifles because there was to him no such 

thing as a trifle.  He was a child who respected his dolls because 

they were the images of the image of od, portraits at only two 

removes."





Here, then, we have the child crossed by the dreamer and the 

mystic, bred of Calvinism and speculation on human fate and chance, 

and on the mystery of temperament and inheritance, and all that 

flows from these - reprobation, with its dire shadows, assured 

lection with its oys, etc., etc.



3. If such a combination is in favour of the story-teller up to a 

certain point, it is not favourable to the highest flights, and it 

is alien to dramatic presentation pure and simple.  This implies 

detachment from moods and characters, high as well as low, that 

complete ustice in presentation may be done to all alie, and the 

one balance that obtains in life grasped and repeated with 

emphasis.  ut towards his leading characters Stevenson is 

unconsciously biassed, because they are more or less shadowy 

proections of himself, or images through which he would reveal one 

or other side or aspect of his own personality.  Attwater is a 

confessed failure, because it, more than any other, testifies this  

he is but a mouth-piece for one side or tendency in Stevenson.  If 

the same thing is not more decisively felt in some other cases, it 

is because Stevenson there showed the better art o' hidin', and not 

because he was any more truly detached or dramatic.  "f Hamlet 

most of all," wrote Henley in his sonnet.  The Hamlet in Stevenson 

- the self-questioning, egotistic, moralising Hamlet - was, and to 

the end remained, a something alien to bold, dramatic, creative 

freedom.  He is great as an artist, as a man bent on giving to all 

that he did the best and most distinguished form possible, but not 

great as a free creator of dramatic power.  "Mother," he said as a 

mere child, "I've drawed a man.  ow, will I draw his soul"  He 

was to the end all too fond to essay a picture of the soul, 

separate and peculiar.  All the eyll and Hyde and even allantrae 

conceptions came out of that - and what is more, he always mixed 

his own soul with the other soul, and could not help doing so.



4. hen therefore, I find Mr inero, in lecturing at dinburgh, 

deciding in favour of Stevenson as possessed of rare dramatic 

power, and wondering why he did not more effectively employ it, I 

can't agree with him and this because of the presence of a certain 

atmosphere in the novels, alien to free play of the individualities 

presented.  ie Hawthorne's, lie the wors of our great 

symbolists, they are restricted by a sense of some obtaining 

conception, some weird metaphysical IRD or preconception.  This 

is the ground "Ian Macaren" has for saying that "his inship is 

not with occaccio and Rabelais, but with Dante and Spenser" - the 

ground for many remars by critics to the effect that they still 

crave from him "less symbol and more individuality" - the ground 

for the Rev. . . Dawson's remar that "he has a powerful and 

persistent sense of the spiritual forces which move behind the 

painted shows of life that he writes not only as a realist but as 

a prophet, his meanest stage being set with eternity as a 

bacground."



Such expressions are fullest ustification for what we have here 

said  it adds, and can only add, to our admiration of Stevenson, 

as a thiner, seer, or mystic, but the asserting sense of such 

power can only end in lessening the height to which he could attain 

as a dramatic artist and there is much indeed against Mr inero's 

own view that, in the dramas, he finds that "fine speeches" are 

ruinous to them as acting plays.  In the strict sense overfine 

speeches are yet almost everywhere.  David alfour could never have 

writ some speeches attributed to him - they are ust R. . 

Stevenson with a very superficial difference that, when once 

detected, renders them curious and quaint and interesting, but not 

dramatic.







CHATR III - RACHR AD MSTIC AIST







I reality, Stevenson is always directly or indirectly preaching a 

sermon - enforcing a moral - as though he could not help it.  "He 

would rise from the dead to preach a sermon."  He wrote some first-

rate fables, and might indeed have figured to effect as a moralist-

fabulist, as truly he was from beginning to end.  There was a bit 

of unyan in him as well as of Aesop and Rousseau and Thoreau - the 

mixture that found coherency in his most peculiarly patient and 

forbearing temper is what gives at once the quaintness, the 

freedom, and yet the odd didactic something that is never wanting.  

I remember a fable about the Devil that might well be brought in to 

illustrate this here - careful readers who neglect nothing that 

Stevenson wrote will remember it also and perhaps bear me out here.



ut for the sae of the young fols who may yet have some leeway to 

mae up, I shall indulge myself a little by quoting it  and, since 

I am on that tac, follow it by another which presents Stevenson in 

his favourite guise of quiing his own characters, if not for his 

own advantage certainly for ours, if we would in the least 

understand the fine moralist-casuistical qualities of his mind and 

fancy





TH DI AD TH IR



nce upon a time the devil stayed at an inn, where no one new him, 

for they were people whose education had been neglected.  He was 

bent on mischief, and for a time ept everybody by the ears.  ut 

at last the inneeper set a watch upon the devil and too him in 

the act.



The inneeper got a rope's end.



"ow I am going to thrash you," said the inn-eeper.



"ou have no right to be angry with me," said the devil.  "I am 

only the devil, and it is my nature to do wrong."



"Is that so" ased the inneeper.



"act, I assure you," said the devil.



"ou really cannot help doing ill" ased the inneeper.



"ot in the smallest," said the devil, "it would be useless cruelty 

to thrash a thing lie me."



"It would indeed," said the inneeper.



And he made a noose and hanged the devil.



"There" said the inneeper.





The deeper Stevenson goes, the more happily is he inspired.  e 

could scarcely cite anything more Stevensonian, alie in its humour 

and its philosophy, than the dialogue between Captain Smollett and 

ong ohn Silver, entitled TH RSS  TH TA.  After chapter 

xxxii. of TRASR ISAD, these two puppets "strolled out to have 

a pipe before business should begin again, and met in an open space 

not far from the story."  After a few preliminaries





"ou're a damned rogue, my man," said the Captain.



"Come, come, Cap'n, be ust," returned the other.  "There's no call 

to be angry with me in earnest.  I'm on'y a character in a sea 

story.  I don't really exist."



"ell, I don't really exist either," says the Captain, "which seems 

to meet that."



"I wouldn't set no limits to what a virtuous character might 

consider argument," responded Silver.  "ut I'm the villain of the 

tale, I am and speaing as one seafaring man to another, what I 

want to now is, what's the odds"



"ere you never taught your catechism" said the Captain.  "Don't 

you now there's such a thing as an Author"



"Such a thing as a Author" returned ohn, derisively.  "And who 

better'n me  And the p'int is, if the Author made you, he made 

ong ohn, and he made Hands, and ew, and eorge Merry - not that 

eorge is up to much, for he's little more'n a name and he made 

lint, what there is of him and he made this here mutiny, you eep 

such a wor about and he had Tom Redruth shot and - well, if 

that's a Author, give me ew"



"Don't you believe in a future state" said Smollett.  "Do you 

thin there's nothing but the present sorty-paper"



" I don't rightly now for that," said Silver, "and I don't see 

what it's got to do with it, anyway.  hat I now is this  if 

there is sich a thing as a Author, I'm his favourite chara'ter.  He 

does me fathoms better'n he does you - fathoms, he does.  And he 

lies doing me.  He eeps me on dec mostly all the time, crutch 

and all and he leaves you measling in the hold, where nobody can't 

see you, nor wants to, and you may lay to that  If there is a 

Author, by thunder, but he's on my side, and you may lay to it"



"I see he's giving you a long rope," said the Captain. . . .





Stevenson's stories - one and all - are too closely the 

illustrations by characters of which his essays furnish the texts.  

ou shall not read the one wholly apart from the other without 

losing something - without losing much of the quaint, often 

childish, and always insinuating personality of the writer.  It is 

this if fully perceived which would ustify one writer, Mr 

angwill, if I don't forget, in saying, as he did say, that 

Stevenson would hold his place by his essays and not by his novels.  

Hence there is a unity in all, but a unity found in a root which is 

ultimately inimical to what is strictly free dramatic creation - 

creation, broad, natural and unmoral in the highest sense ust as 

nature is, as it is to us, for example, when we spea of 

Shaespeare, or even Scott, or of Cervantes or ielding.  If Mr 

Henley in his irruptive if not spiteful A MA MAAI article 

had made this clear from the high critical ground, then some of his 

derogatory remars would not have been quite so personal and 

offensive as they are.



Stevenson's bohemianism was always restrained and coloured by this.  

He is a casuistic moralist, if not a Shorter Catechist, as Mr 

Henley put it in his clever sonnet.  He is constantly asing 

himself about moral laws and how they wor themselves out in 

character, especially as these suggest and involve the casuistries 

of human nature.  He is often a little lie athaniel Hawthorne, 

but he hardly follows them far enough and rests on his own 

preconceptions and predilections, only he does not, lie him, get 

into or remain long in the cobwebby corners - his love of the open 

air and exercise derived from generations of active lighthouse 

engineers, out at all times on sea or land, or from Scottish 

ministers who were fond of composing their sermons and reflecting 

on the bacwardness of human nature as they waled in their gardens 

or along the hillsides even among mists and storms, did something 

to save him here, reinforcing natural cheerfulness and the warm 

desire to give pleasure.  His excessive elaboration of style, which 

grew upon him more and more, giving throughout often a sense of 

extreme artificiality and of the self-consciousness usually bred of 

it, is but another incidental proof of this.  And let no reader 

thin that I wish here to decry R. . Stevenson.  I only desire 

faithfully to try to understand him, and to indicate the class or 

group to which his genius and temperament really belong.  He is 

from first to last the idealistic dreamy or mystical romancer, and 

not the true idealist or dealer direct with life or character for 

its own sae.  The very beauty and sweetness of his spirit in one 

way militated against his dramatic success - he really did not 

believe in villains, and always made them better than they should 

have been, and that, too, on the very side where wicedness - their 

natural wicedness - is most available - on the stage.  The dreamer 

of dreams and the Shorter Catechist, strangely united together, 

were here directly at odds with the creative power, and crossed and 

misdirected it, and the casuist came in and manoeuvred the 

limelight - all too lie the old devil of the mediaeval drama, who 

was made only to be laughed at and taen lightly, a buffoon and a 

laughing-stoc indeed.  And while he could unveil villainy, as is 

the case pre-eminently in Huish in the -TID, he shran from 

inflicting the punishments for which untutored human nature loos, 

and thus he lost one great aid to crude dramatic effect.  As to his 

poems, they are intimately personal in his happiest moments  he 

deals with separate moods and sentiments, and scarcely ever touches 

those of a type alien to his own.  The defect of his child poems is 

distinctly that he is everywhere strictly recalling and reproducing 

his own quaint and wholly exceptional childhood and children, 

ordinary, normal, healthy children, will not tae to these poems 

(though grown-ups largely do so), as they would to, say, the 

IIT  of my old friend, . . Rands.  Rands showed a great 

deal of true dramatic play there within his own very narrow limits, 

as, at all events, adults must conceive them.



ven in his greatest wors, in TH MASTR  AATRA and IR  

HRMIST, the special power in Stevenson really lies in subduing 

his characters at the most critical point for action, to mae them 

prove or sustain his thesis and in this way the rare effect that 

he might have secured DRAMATICA is largely lost and mae-believe 

substituted, as in the Treasure Search in the end of TH MASTR  

AATRA.  The powerful dramatic effect he might have had in his 

DMT is thus completely sacrificed.  The essence of the drama 

for the stage is that the wor is for this and this alone - 

dialogue and everything being only wored rightly when it bears on, 

aids, and finally secures this in happy completeness.



In a word, you always, in view of true dramatic effect, see 

Stevenson himself too clearly behind his characters.  The "fine 

speeches" Mr inero referred to trace to the intrusion behind the 

glass of a part-quicsilvered portion, which cunningly shows, when 

the glass is moved about, Stevenson himself behind the character, 

as we have said already.  or long he shied dealing with women, as 

though by a true instinct.  nfortunately for him his image was as 

clear behind CATRIA, with the discerning, as anywhere else and 

this, alas too far undid her as an independent, individual 

character, though traits lie those in her author were attractive.  

The constant effort to relieve the sense of this affords him the 

most admirable openings for the display of his exquisite style, of 

which he seldom or never fails to mae the very most in this 

regard but the necessity laid upon him to aim at securing a sense 

of relief by this is precisely the same as led him to write the 

overfine speeches in the plays, as Mr inero found and pointed out 

at dinburgh  both defeat the true end, but in the written boo 

mere art of style and a naivete and a certain sweetness of temper 

conceal the lac of nature and creative spontaneity while on the 

stage the descriptions, saving reflections and fine asides, are 

ruthlessly cut away under sheer stage necessities, or, if left, but 

hinder the action and art of this ind does not there suffice to 

conceal the lac of nature.



More clearly to bring out my meaning here and draw aid from 

comparative illustration, let me tae my old friend of many years, 

Charles ibbon.  ibbon was poor, very poor, in intellectual 

subtlety compared with Stevenson he had none of his sweet, quaint, 

original fancy he was no casuist he was utterly void of power in 

the subdued humorous twinle or genial by-play in which Stevenson 

excelled.  ut he has more of dramatic power, pure and simple, than 

Stevenson had - his novels - the best of them - would far more 

easily yield themselves to the ordinary purposes of the ordinary 

playwright.  Along with conscientiousness, perception, penetration, 

with the dramatist must go a certain indescribable common-sense 

commonplaceness - if I may name it so - protection against vagary 

and that over-refined egotism and self-confession which is inimical 

to the drama and in which the Stevensonian type all too largely 

abounds for successful dramatic production.  Mr Henley perhaps put 

it too strongly when he said that what was supremely of interest to 

R. . Stevenson was Stevenson himself but he indicates the 

tendency, and that tendency is inimical to strong, broad, effective 

and varied dramatic presentation.  ater cannot rise above its own 

level nor can minds of this type go freely out of themselves in a 

grandly healthy, unconscious, and unaffected way, and this is the 

secret of the dramatic spirit, if it be not, as Shelley said, the 

secret of morals, which Stevenson, when he passed away, was but on 

the way to attain.  As we shall see, he had risen so far above it, 

subdued it, triumphed over it, that we really cannot guess what he 

might have attained had but more years been given him.  or the 

last attainment of the loftiest and truest genius is precisely this 

- to gain such insight of the real that all else becomes 

subsidiary.  True simplicity and the abiding relief and enduring 

power of true art with all classes lies here and not elsewhere.  

Cleverness, refinement, fancy, and invention, even sublety of 

intellect, are practically nowhere in this sphere without this.







CHATR I - STS AS DRAMATIST







I opposition to Mr inero, therefore, I assert that Stevenson's 

defect in spontaneous dramatic presentation is seen clearly in his 

novels as well as in his plays proper.



In writing to my good friend, Mr Thomas M'ie, Advocate, dinburgh, 

telling him of my wor on R. . Stevenson and the results, I thus 

gathered up in little the broad reflections on this point, and I 

may perhaps be excused quoting the following passages, as they 

reinforce by a new reference or illustration or two what has ust 

been said





"Considering his great eenness and force on some sides, I find R. 

. Stevenson maredly deficient in grip on other sides - common 

sides, after all, of human nature.  This was so far largely due to 

a dreamy, mystical, so far perverted and, so to say, often even 

inverted casuistical, fatalistic morality, which would not allow 

him scope in what Carlyle would have called a healthy hatred of 

fools and scoundrels with both of which classes - vagabonds in 

strictness - he had rather too much of a sneaing sympathy.  Mr 

inero was wrong - totally and incomprehensibly wrong - when he 

told the good fols of dinburgh at the hilosophical Institution, 

and afterwards at the ondon irbec Institution, that it was lac 

of concentration and care that made R. . Stevenson a failure as a 

dramatist.  o  it was here and not elsewhere that the failure 

lay.  R. . Stevenson was himself an unconscious paradox - and 

sometimes he realised it - his great weaness from this point of 

view being that he wished to show strong and original by maing the 

villain the hero of the piece as well.  ow, THAT, if it may, by 

clever manipulation and dexterity, be made to do in a novel, most 

certainly it will not do on the stage - more especially if it is 

done consciously and, as it were, of MAIC RS because, for 

one thing, there is in the theatre a very varied yet united 

audience which has to give a simultaneous and immediate verdict - 

an audience not inclined to some inds of overwrought subtleties 

and casuistries, however clever the technique.  If TH MASTR  

AATRA (which has some highly dramatic scenes and situations, 

if it is not in itself substantially a drama) were to be put on the 

stage, the playwright, if wisely determined for success, would 

really have - not in details, but in essential conception - to ic 

R. . Stevenson in his most personal aim out of it, and tae and 

present a more definite moral view of the two villain-heroes 

(brothers, too) improve and elevate the one a bit if he lowered 

the other, and not wobble in sympathy and try to mae the audience 

wobble in sympathy also, as R. . Stevenson certainly does.  As for 

A ASTI, it most emphatically, in view of this, should be re-

writ - re-writ especially towards the ending - and the scandalous 

eau tarred and feathered, metaphorically speaing, instead of 

waling off at the end in a sneaing, mincing sort of way, with no 

more than a little momentary twinge of discomfort at the wrec and 

ruin he has wrought, for having acted as a selfish, snivelling 

poltroon and coward, though in fine clothes and with fine ways and 

fine manners, which only, from our point of view, mae matters 

worse.  It is, with variations I admit, much the same all through  

R. . Stevenson felt it and confessed it about the -TID, and 

Huish, the cocney hero and villain but the sense of healthy 

disgust, even at the vile Huish, is not emphasised in the boo as 

it would have demanded to be for the stage - the audience would not 

have stood it, and the more mixed and varied, the less would it 

have stood it - not at all and his relief of style and fine or 

finished speeches would not THR in the least have told.  This is 

demanded of the drama - that at once it satisfies a certain crude 

something subsisting under all outward glosses and veneers that 

might be in some a lively sense of right and wrong - the uprisal of 

a conscience, in fact, or in others a vague instinct of proper 

reward or punishment, which will even cover and sanction certain 

inds of revenge or retaliation.  The one feeling will emerge most 

among the cultured, and the other among the ruder and more 

ignorant but both meet immediately on beholding action and the 

limits of action on the demand for some clear leading to what may 

be called rovidential equity - each man undoubtedly rewarded or 

punished, roughly, according to his deserts, if not outwardly then 

certainly in the inner torments that so often lead to confessions.  

There it is - a radical fact of human nature - as radical as any 

reading of trait or determination of character presented - seen in 

the ree drama as well as in Shaespeare and the great liabethan 

dramatists, and in the drama-transpontine and others of to-day.  R. 

. Stevenson was all too casuistical (though not in the exclusively 

bad sense) for this and so he was not dramatic, though IR  

HRMIST promised something lie an advance to it, and ST IS 

did, in my idea, yet more."





The one essential of a DRAMATIC piece is that, by the interaction 

of character and incident (one or other may be preponderating, 

according to the type and intention of the writer) all naturally 

leads up to a crisis in which the moral motives, appealed to or 

awaened by the presentation of the play, are ustified.  here 

this is wanting the true leading and the definite ustification are 

wanting.  oethe failed in this in his AST, resourceful and far-

seeing though he was - he failed because a certain sympathy is 

awaened for Mephistopheles in being, so to say, chivied out of his 

bargain, when he had complied with the terms of the contract by 

aust and ounod in his opera does exactly for "immediate dramatic 

effect," what we hold it would be necessary to do for R. . 

Stevenson.  oethe, with his casuistries which led him to allegory 

and all manner of overdone symbolisms and perversions in the Second 

art, is set aside and a true crisis and close is found by ounod 

through simply sending Marguerite above and aust below, as, 

indeed, aust had agreed by solemn compact with Mephistopheles that 

it should be.  And to come to another illustration from our own 

times, Mr ernard Shaw's very clever and all too ingenious and 

over-subtle MA AD SRMA would, in my idea, and for much the 

same reason, be an utterly ineffective and wea piece on the stage, 

however carefully handled and however clever the setting - the 

reason lying in the egotistic upsetting of the "personal equation" 

and the theory of life that lies behind all - tinting it with 

strange and even TR colours.  Much the same has to be said of 

most of what are problem-plays - several of Ibsen's among the rest.



Those who remember the airy opera of HAS AD RT on the 

stage in ondon, will not have forgotten in the witching memory of 

all the charms of scenery and setting, how the scene where the 

witch of the wood, who was planning out the baing of the little 

hero and heroine in her oven, having "fatted" them up well, to mae 

sweet her eating of them, was by the coolness and cleverness of the 

heroine loced in her own oven and baed there, literally brought 

down the house.  She received exactly what she had planned to give 

those children, whom their own cruel parents had unwittingly, by 

losing the children in the wood, put into her hands.  uaint, 

naive, half-grotesque it was in conception, yet the truth of all 

drama was there actively exhibited, and all casuistic pleading of 

excuses of some sort, even of ustification for the witch (that it 

was her nature heredity in her aworing, etc., etc.) would have 

not only been out of place, but hotly resented by that audience.  

ow, Stevenson, if he could have made up his mind to have the witch 

loced in her own oven, would most assuredly have tried some device 

to get her out by some fairy witch-device or magic slide at the far 

end of it, and have proceeded to paint for us the changed character 

that she was after she had been so outwitted by a child, and her 

witchdom proved after all of little effect.  He would have put 

probably some of the most effective moralities into her mouth if 

indeed he would not after all have made the witch a triumph on his 

early principle of bad-heartedness being strength.  If this is the 

sort of falsification which the play demands, and is of all tastes 

the most ungrateful, then, it is clear, that for full effect of the 

drama it is essential to it but what is primary in it is the 

direct answering to certain immediate and instinctive demands in 

common human nature, the doing of which is far more effective than 

no end of deep philosophy to show how much better human nature 

would be if it were not ust quite thus constituted.  

"Concentration," says Mr inero, "is first, second, and last in 

it," and he goes on thus, as reported in the SCTSMA, to show 

Stevenson's defect and mistae and, as is not, of course, 

unnatural, to magnify the greatness and grandeur of the style of 

wor in which he has himself been so successful.





"If Stevenson had ever mastered that art - and I do not question 

that if he had properly conceived it he had it in him to master it 

- he might have found the stage a gold mine, but he would have 

found, too, that it is a gold mine which cannot be wored in a 

smiling, sportive, half-contemptuous spirit, but only in the sweat 

of the brain, and with every mental nerve and sinew strained to its 

uttermost.  He would have nown that no ingots are to be got out of 

this mine, save after sleepless nights, days of gloom and 

discouragement, and other days, again, of feverish toil, the result 

of which proves in the end to be misapplied and has to be thrown to 

the winds. . . . hen you tae up a play-boo (if ever you do tae 

one up) it stries you as being a very trifling thing - a mere 

insubstantial pamphlet beside the imposing bul of the latest six-

shilling novel.  ittle do you guess that every page of the play 

has cost more care, severer mental tension, if not more actual 

manual labour, than any chapter of a novel, though it be fifty 

pages long.  It is the height of the author's art, according to the 

old maxim, that the ordinary spectator should never be clearly 

conscious of the sill and travail that have gone to the maing of 

the finished product.  ut the artist who would achieve a lie feat 

must realise its difficulties, or what are his chances of success"





ut what I should, in little, be inclined to say, in answer to the 

"concentration" idea is that, unless you have first some firm hold 

on the broad bed-roc facts of human nature specially appealed to 

or called forth by the drama, you may concentrate as much as you 

please, but you will not write a successful acting drama, not to 

spea of a great one.  Mr inero's magnifications of the immense 

effort demanded from him must in the end come to mean that he 

himself does not instinctively and with natural ease and 

spontaneity secure this, but secures it only after great conscious 

effort and hence, perhaps, it is that he as well as so many other 

modern playwrights fall so far behind alie in the amount turned 

out, and also in its quality as compared with the products of many 

playwrights in the past.



The problem drama, in every phase and turn of it, endeavours to 

dispense with these fundamental demands implied in the common and 

instinctive sense or consciousness of the mass of men and women, 

and to substitute for that interest something which will 

artificially supersede it, or, at any rate, tae its place.  The 

interest is transferred from the crises necessarily wored up to in 

the one case, with all of situation and dialogue directed to it, 

and without which it would not be strictly explicable, to something 

abnormal, odd, artificial or inverted, or exceptional in the 

characters themselves.  Having thus, instead of natural process and 

sequence, if we may put it so, the problem dramatist has a double 

tas - he must gain what unity he can, and reach such crises as he 

may by artificial aids and inventions which the more he uses the 

more maes natural simplicity unattainable and next he must reduce 

and hide as far as he can the abnormality he has, after all, in the 

long run, created and presented.  He cannot maintain it to the 

full, else his wor would become a mere medical or psychological 

treatise under the poorest of disguises and the very necessity for 

the action and reaction of characters upon each other is a further 

element against him.  In a word no one character can stand alone, 

and cannot escape influencing others, and also the action.  Thus it 

is that he cannot isolate as a doctor does his patient for 

scientific examination.  The healthy and normal must come in to 

modify on all sides what is presented of unhealthy and abnormal, 

and by its very presence expose the other, while at the same time 

it, by its very presence, ministers improvement, exactly as the 

sunlight disperses mist and all unhealthy vapours, germs, and 

microbes.



The problem dramatist, in place of broad effect and truth to 

nature, must find it in stress of invention and resource of that 

ind.  Thus care and concentration must be all in all with him - he 

must never let himself go, or get so interested and taen with his 

characters that TH, in a sense, control or direct him.  He is all 

too conscious a "maer" and must pay for his originality by what in 

the end is really painful and overweighted wor.  This, I tae it, 

is the reason why so many of the modern dramatists find their wor 

so hard, and are, comparatively, so slow in the production of it, 

while they would fain, by many devices, secure the general 

impression or appeal made to all classes alie by the natural or 

what we may call spontaneous drama, they are yet, by the necessity 

of subect matter and methods of dealing with it, limited to the 

real interest of a special class - to whom is finally given up what 

was meant for manind - and the troublesome and trying tas laid on 

them, to try as best they may to reconcile two really conflicting 

tendencies which cannot even by art be reconciled but really point 

different ways and tend to different ends.  As the impressionist 

and the pre-Raphaelite, in the sister-art of painting cannot be 

combined and reconciled in one painter - so it is here by 

conception and methods they go different ways, and if they S the 

same end, it is by opposing processes - the original conception 

alie of nature and of art dictating the process.



As for Stevenson, it was no lac of care or concentration in 

anything that he touched these two were never lacing, but because 

his subtlety, mystical bias and dreaminess, and theorising on human 

nature made this to him impossible.  He might have concentrated as 

much as he pleased, concentrated as much as even Mr inero desires, 

but he would not have made a successful drama, because he was 

Robert ouis Stevenson, and not Mr inero, and too long, as he 

himself confessed, had a tendency to thin bad-heartedness was 

strength while the only true and enduring oy attainable in this 

world - whether by deduction from life itself, or from IMRSSIS 

of art or of the drama, is simply the steady, unassailable, and 

triumphant consciousness that it is not so, but the reverse, that 

goodness and self-sacrifice and self-surrender are the only 

strength in the universe.  ust as yron had it with patriotism-





"reedom's battle once begun,

equeathed from bleeding sire to son,

Tho' baffled oft is ever won."





To go consciously either in fiction or in the drama for bad-

heartedness as strength, is to court failure - the broad, healthy, 

human heart, than Heaven, is so made as to resent the doctrine 

and if a fiction or a play based on this idea for the moment 

succeeds, it can only be because of strength in other elements, or 

because of partial blindness and partially paralysed moral sense in 

the case of those who accept it and oy in it.  If Mr inero 

directly disputes this, then he and I have no common standing-

ground, and I need not follow the matter any further.  f course, 

the dramatist may, under mistaen sympathy and in the midst of 

complex and bewildering concatenations, give wrong readings to his 

audience, but he must not be always doing even that, or doing it on 

principle or system, else his wor, however careful and 

concentrated, will before long share the fate of the Stevenson-

Henley dramas confessedly wrought when the authors all too 

definitely held bad-heartedness was strength.







CHATR  - THR  D AD I







 have not hitherto concerned ourselves, in any express sense, 

with the ethical elements involved in the tendency now dwelt on, 

though they are, of necessity, of a very vital character.  e have 

shown only as yet the effect of this mood of mind on dramatic 

intention and effort.  The position is simply that there is, 

broadly speaing, the endeavour to eliminate an element which is 

essential to successful dramatic presentation.  That element is the 

eternal distinction, speaing broadly, between good and evil - 

between right and wrong - between the secret consciousness of 

having done right, and the consciousness of mere strength and force 

in certain other ways.



othing else will mae up for vagueness and cloudiness here - no 

technical sill, no apt dialogue nor concentration, any more than 

"fine speeches," as Mr inero calls them.  ow the dramatic demand 

and the ethical demand here meet and tae each other's hands, and 

will not be separated.  This is why Mr Stevenson and Mr Henley - 

young men of great talent, failed - utterly failed - they thought 

they could mae a hero out of a shady and dare-devil yet really 

cowardly villain generally - and failed.



The spirit of this is of the clever youth type - all too ready to 

forego the moral for the sae of the fun any day of the wee, and 

the unthining selfishness and self-enoyment of youth - whose 

tender mercies are often cruel, are transcendent in it.  As 

Stevenson himself said, they were young men then and fancied bad-

heartedness was strength.  erhaps it was a sense of this that made 

R. . Stevenson spea as he did of the -TID with Huish the 

cocney in it, after he was powerless to recall it which made him 

say, as we have seen, that the closing chapters of TH MASTR  

AATRA "SHAM, AD RHAS DRAD, TH II."  He himself 

came to see then the great error but, alas it was too late to 

remedy it - he could but go forward to essay new tales, not 

bacward to put right errors in what was done.



Did Mr illiam Archer have anything of this in his mind and the 

far-reaching effects on this side, when he wrote the following





"et me add that the omission with which, in 15, I mildly 

reproached him - the omission to tell what he new to be an 

essential part of the truth about life - was abundantly made good 

in his later writings.  It is true that even in his final 

philosophy he still seems to me to underrate, or rather to shir, 

the significance of that most compendious parable which he thus 

relates in a letter to Mr Henry ames- 'Do you now the story of 

the man who found a button in his hash, and called the waiter  

"hat do you call that" says he.  "ell," said the waiter, "what 

d'you expect  xpect to find a gold watch and chain"  Heavenly 

apologue, is it not'  Heavenly, by all means but I thin 

Stevenson relished the humour of it so much that he 'smiling passed 

the moral by.'  In his enoyment of the waiter's effrontery, he 

forgot to sympathise with the man (even though it was himself) who 

had broen his teeth upon the harmful, unnecessary button.  He 

forgot that all the apologetics in the world are based upon ust 

this audacious paralogism."





Many writers have done the same - and not a few critics have hinted 

at this  I do not thin any writer has got at the radical truth of 

it more directly, decisively, and clearly than ". . M.," in a 

monthly magaine, about the time of Stevenson's death and the 

whole is so good and clear that I must quote it - the writer was 

not thining of the drama specially only of prose fiction, and 

this but maes the passage the more effective and apt to my point.





"In the outburst of regret which followed the death of Robert ouis 

Stevenson, one leading ournal dwelt on his too early removal in 

middle life 'with only half his message delivered.'  Such a phrase 

may have been used in the mere cant of modern ournalism.  Still it 

set one questioning what was Stevenson's message, or at least that 

part of it which we had time given us to hear.



"onderful as was the popularity of the dead author, we are 

inclined to doubt whether the right appreciation of him was half as 

wide.  To a certain section of the public he seemed a successful 

writer of boys' boos, which yet held captive older people.  ow, 

undoubtedly there was an element (not the highest) in his wor 

which fascinated boys.  It gratified their yearning for adventure.  

To too large a number of his readers, we suspect, this remains 

Stevenson's chief charm though even of those there were many able 

to recognise and be thanful for the literary power and grace which 

could serve up their sanguinary diet so daintily.



"Most of Stevenson's titles, too, lie TRASR ISAD, IDAD, 

and TH MASTR  AATRA, tended to foster delusion in this 

direction.  The boos were largely bought for gifts by maiden 

aunts, and bestowed as school pries, when it might not have been 

so had their titles given more indication of their real scope and 

tendency.



"All this, it seems to us, has somewhat obscured Stevenson's true 

power, which is surely that of an arch-delineator of 'human nature' 

and of the devious ways of men.  As we read him we feel that we 

have our finger on the pulse of the cruel politics of the world.  

He has the Shaespearean gift which maes us recognise that his 

pirates and his statesmen, with their violence and their murders 

and their perversions of ustice, are swayed by the same interests 

and are pulling the same strings and playing on the same passions 

which are at wor in quieter methods around ourselves.  The vast 

crimes and the recless bloodshed are nothing more nor less than 

stage effects used to accentuate for the common eye what the seer 

can detect without them.



"And reading him from this standpoint, Stevenson's 'message' (so 

far as it was delivered) appears to be that of utter gloom - the 

creed that good is always overcome by evil.  e do not mean in the 

sense that good always suffers through evil and is frequently 

crucified by evil.  That is only the sowing of the martyr's blood, 

which is, we now, the seed of the Church.  e should not have 

marvelled in the least that a genius lie Stevenson should rebel 

against mere external 'happy endings,' which, being in flat 

contradiction to the ordinary ways of rovidence, are little short 

of thoughtless blasphemy against rovidence.  ut the terrible 

thing about the Stevenson philosophy of life is that it seems to 

mae evil overcome good in the sense of absorbing it, or perverting 

it, or at best lowering it.  hen good and evil come in conflict in 

one person, Dr eyll vanishes into Mr Hyde.  The awful Master of 

allantrae drags down his brother, though he seems to fight for his 

soul at every step.  The sequel to IDAD shows David alfour 

ready at last to be hail-fellow-well-met with the supple 

restongrange and the other intriguers, even though they had 

forcibly made him a partner to their shedding of innocent blood.



"Is it possible that this was what Stevenson's experience of real 

life had brought him  ortunate himself in so many respects, he 

was yet one of those who turn aside from the smooth and sunny paths 

of life, to enter into brotherly sympathy and fellowship with the 

disinherited.  Is this, then, what he found on those darer levels  

Did he discover that triumphant hypocrisy treads down souls as well 

as lives



"e cannot doubt that it often does so and it is well that we 

should see this sometimes, to mae us strong to contend with evil 

before it wors out this, its worst mischief, and to rouse us from 

the easy optimist lainess which sits idle while others are being 

wronged, and bids them believe 'that all will come right in the 

end,' when it is our direct duty to do our utmost to mae it 'come 

right' to-day.



"ut to show us nothing but the gloomy side, nothing but the 

weaness of good, nothing but the strength of evil, does not 

inspire us to contend for the right, does not inform us of the 

powers and weapons with which we might so contend.  To gae at 

unqualified and inevitable moral defeat will but leave us to the 

still worse lainess of pessimism, uttering its discouraging and 

blasphemous cry, 'It does not matter nothing will ever come 

right'



"Shaespeare has shown us - and never so nobly as in his last great 

creation of TH TMST - that a man has one stronghold which none 

but himself can deliver over to the enemy - that citadel of his own 

conduct and character, from which he can smile supreme upon the 

foe, who may have conquered all down the line, but must finally 

mae pause there.



"e must remember that TH TMST was Shaespeare's last wor.  

The genuine consciousness of the possible triumph of the moral 

nature against every assault is probably reserved for the later 

years of life, when, somewhat withdrawn from the passions of its 

struggle, we become those looers-on who see most of the game.  

Strange fate is it that so much of our genius vanishes into the 

great silence before those later years are reached"





Stevenson was too late in awaening fully to the tragic error to 

which short-sighted youth is apt to wander that "bad-heartedness is 

strength."  And so, from this point of view, to our sorrow, he too 

much verified oethe's saw that "simplicity (not artifice) and 

repose are the acme of art, and therefore no youth can be a 

master."  In fact, he might very well from another side, have taen 

one of oethe's fine sayings as a motto for himself





"reatest saints were ever most indly-hearted to sinners

Here I'm a saint with the best sinners I never could hate." ()





Stevenson's own verdict on DAC RDI given to a  R HRAD 

reporter on the author's arrival in ew or in September 1, on 

the DAT HI, is thus very near the precise truth  "The piece 

has been all overhauled, and though I have no idea whether it will 

please an audience, I don't thin either Mr Henley or I are ashamed 

of it.  T  R TH  M H  DID THAT, AD I THI  

HAD A IDA THAT AD-HARTDSS AS STRTH."



If Mr Henley in any way confirmed R. . Stevenson in this 

perversion, as I much fear he did, no true admirer of Stevenson has 

much to than him for, whatever claims he may have fancied he had 

to Stevenson's eternal gratitude.  He did Stevenson about the very 

worst turn he could have done, and aided and abetted in robbing us 

and the world of yet greater wors than we have had from his hands.  

He was but condemning himself when he wrote some of the detractory 

things he did in the A MA MAAI about the DIRH 

DITI, etc.  Men are mirrors in which they see each other  

Henley, after all, painted himself much more effectively in that 

now notorious A MA MAAI article than he did R. . 

Stevenson.  Such is the penalty men too often pay for wreaing 

paltry revenges - writing under morbid memories and narrow and 

petty grievances - they not only fail in truth and impartiality, 

but inscribe a ind of grotesque parody of themselves in their 

effort to mae their subect ridiculous, as he did, for example, 

about the name ewisouis, and various other things.



R. . Stevenson's fate was to be a casuistic and mystic moralist at 

bottom, and could not help it while, owing to some in or twist, 

due, perhaps, mainly to his earlier sufferings, and the teachings 

he then received, he could not help giving it always a turn to what 

he himself called "tail-foremost" or inverted morality and it was 

not till near the close that he fully awaened to the fact that 

here he was false to the truest canons at once of morality and life 

and art, and that if he pursued this course his doom was, and would 

be, to mae his endings "disgrace, or perhaps, degrade his 

beginnings," and that no true and effective dramatic unity and 

effect and climax was to be gained.  ity that he did so much on 

this perverted view of life and world and art  and well it is that 

he came to perceive it, even though almost too late- certainly too 

late for that full presentment of that awful yet gladdening 

presence of a od's power and equity in this seeming tangled web of 

a world, the idea which inspired Robert rowning as well as 

ordsworth, when he wrote, and gathered it up into a few lines in 

IA ASSS





"The year's at the spring,

And day's at the morn

Morning's at seven

The hillsides dew-pearled



The lar's on the wing

The snail's on the thorn

od's in His heaven,

All's right with the world.



. . . . . . . . . . . .



"All service rans the same with od,

If now, as formerly he trod

aradise, His presence fills

ur earth, each only as od wills

Can wor - od's puppets best and worst,

Are we there is no last or first."





It shows what he might have accomplished, had longer life been but 

allowed him.







CHATR I - STS'S M







TH problem of Stevenson's gloom cannot be solved by any 

commonplace cut-and-dried process.  It will remain a problem only 

unless (1) his original dreamy tendency crossed, if not warped, by 

the fatalistic Calvinism which was drummed into him by father, 

mother, and nurse in his tender years, is taen fully into account 

then (2) the peculiar action on such a nature of the unsatisfying 

and, on the whole, distracting effect of the bohemian and hail-

fellow-well-met sort of ideal to which he yielded, and which has to 

be charged with much and (3) the conflict in him of a eenly 

social animus with a very strong egotistical effusiveness, fed by 

fancy, and nourished by the enforced solitariness inevitable in the 

case of one who, from early years up, suffered from painful, and 

even crushing, disease.



His text and his sermon - which may be shortly summed in the 

following sentence - be ind, for in indness to others lies the 

only true pleasure to be gained in life be cheerful, even to the 

point of egotistic self-satisfaction, for through cheerfulness only 

is the flow of this incessant indliness of thought and service 

possible.  He was not in harmony with the actual effect of much of 

his creative wor, though he illustrated this in his life, as few 

men have done.  He regarded it as the highest duty of life to give 

pleasure to others his art in his own idea thus became in an 

unostentatious way consecrated, and while he would not have claimed 

to be a seer, any more than he would have claimed to be a saint, as 

he would have held in contempt a mere sybarite, most certainly a 

vein of unblamable hedonism pervaded his whole philosophy of life.  

Suffering constantly, he still was always indly.  He encouraged, 

as Mr osse has said, this philosophy by every resource open to 

him.  In practical life, all who new him declared that he was 

brightness, naive fancy, and sunshine personified, and yet he could 

not help always, somehow, infusing into his fiction a pronounced, 

and sometimes almost fatal, element of gloom.  ven in his own case 

they were not pleasure-giving and failed thus in essence.  Some 

wise critic has said that no man can ever write well creatively of 

that in which in his early youth he had no nowledge.  Always 

behind Stevenson's latest exercises lies the shadow of this as an 

unshifting bacground, which by art may be relieved, but never 

refined away wholly.  He cannot escape from it if he would.  Here, 

too, as eorge MacDonald has neatly and nicely said  e are the 

victims of our own past, and often a hand is put forth upon us from 

behind and draws us into life bacward.  Here was Stevenson, with 

his half-hedonistic theories of life, the duty of giving pleasure, 

of maing eyes brighter, and casting sunshine around one wherever 

one went, yet the creator of gloom for us, when all the world was 

before him where to choose.  This fateful shadow pursued him to the 

end, often giving us, as it were, the very ustificative ground for 

his own father's despondency and gloom, which the son rather too 

decisively reproved, while he might have sympathised with it in a 

stranger, and in that most characteristic letter to his mother, 

which we have quoted, said that it made his father often seem, to 

him, to be ungrateful - "HAS TH MA  RATITD"  Two selves 

thus persistently and constantly struggled in Stevenson.  He was 

from this point of view, indeed, his own Dr eyll and Mr Hyde, the 

buoyant, self-enoying, because pleasure-conferring, man, and at 

the same time the helpless yet fascinating "dar interpreter" of 

the gloomy and gloom-inspiring side of life, viewed from the point 

of view of dominating character and inherited influence.  hen he 

reached out his hand with desire of pleasure-conferring, lo and 

behold, as he wrote, a hand from his forefathers was stretched out, 

and he was pulled bacward so that, as he has confessed, his 

endings were apt to shame, perhaps to degrade, the beginnings.  

Here is something pointing to the hidden and secret springs that 

feed the deeper will and bend it to their service.  Individuality 

itself is but a mirror, which by its inequalities transforms things 

to odd shapes.  Hawthorne confessed to something of this sort.  He, 

lie Stevenson, suffered much in youth, if not from disease then 

through accident, which ept him long from youthful company.  At a 

time when he should have been running free with other boys, he had 

to be lonely, reading what boos he could lay his hands on, mostly 

mournful and puritanic, by the borders of lone Sebago ae.  He 

that hath once in youth been touched by this Marah-rod of 

bitterness will not easily escape from it, when he essays in later 

years to paint life and the world as he sees them nay, the hand, 

when he deems himself freest, will be laid upon him from behind, if 

not to pull him, as MacDonald has said, into life bacward, then to 

mae him a mournful witness of having once been touched by the 

Marah-rod, whose bitterness again declares itself and wells out its 

bitterness when set even in the rising and the stirring of the 

waters.



Such is our view of the "gloom" of Stevenson - a gloom which well 

might have ustified something of his father's despondency.  He 

struggles in vain to escape from it - it narrows, it fatefully 

hampers and limits the free field of his art, lays upon it a 

strange atmosphere, fascinating, but not favourable to true 

dramatic breadth and force, and spontaneous natural simplicity, 

invariably lending a certain touch of weaness, inconsistency, and 

inconclusiveness to his endings so that he himself could too often 

spea of them afterwards as apt to "shame, perhaps to degrade, the 

beginnings."  This is what true dramatic art should never do.  In 

the ending all that may raise legitimate question in the process - 

all that is confusing, perplexing in the separate parts - is met, 

solved, reconciled, at least in a way satisfactory to the general, 

or ordinary mind and thus such unity is by it so gained and 

sealed, that in no case can the true artist, whatever faults may 

lie in portions of the process-wor, say of his endings that "they 

shame, perhaps degrade, the beginning."  herever this is the case 

there will be "gloom," and there will also be a sad, tormenting 

sense of something wanting.  "The evening brings a 'hame'" so 

should it be here - should it especially be in a dramatic wor.  If 

not, "e start for soul is wanting there" or, if not soul, then 

the last halo of the soul's serene triumph.  rom this side, too, 

there is another cause for the undramatic character, in the 

stricter sense of Stevenson's wor generally  it is, after all, 

distressful, unsatisfying, egotistic, for fancy is led at the bec 

of some pre-established disharmony which throws bac an abiding and 

irremovable gloom on all that went before and the free spontaneous 

grace of natural creation which ensures natural simplicity is, as 

said already, not quite attained.



It was well pointed out in HAMMRT, by an unanonymous author 

there quoted (pp. 22, 23), that while in the story, Hyde, the worse 

one, wins, in Stevenson himself - in his real life - eyll won, 

and not Mr Hyde.  This writer, too, might have added that the 

Master of allantrae also wins as well as eau Austin and Deacon 

rodie.  R. . Stevenson's dramatic art and a good deal of his 

fiction, then, was untrue to his life, and on one side was a lie - 

it was not in consonance with his own practice or his belief as 

expressed in life.



In some other matters the test laid down here is not difficult of 

application.  Stevenson, at the time he wrote TH RIR AT 

HM, had seen a good deal he had been abroad he had already had 

experiences he had had differences with his father about Calvinism 

and some other things and yet ust see how he applies the standard 

of his earlier nowledge and observation to ngland - and by doing 

so, cannot help exaggerating the outstanding differences, always 

with an almost provincial accent of unwavering conviction due to 

his early associations and nowledge.  He cannot help paying an 

excessive tribute to the Calvinism he had formally reected, in so 

far as, according to him, it goes to form character - even national 

character, at all events, in its production of types and he never 

in any really effective way glances at what Mr Matthew Arnold 

called "Scottish manners, Scottish drin" as elements in any way 

radically qualifying.  It is not, of course, that I, as a Scotsman, 

well acquainted with rural life in some parts of ngland, as with 

rural life in many parts of Scotland in my youth, do not heartily 

agree with him - the point is that, when he comes to this sort of 

comparison and contrast, he writes exactly as his father would or 

might have done, with a full consciousness, after all, of the 

tribute he was paying to the practical outcome on character of the 

Calvinism in which he so thoroughly believed.  It is, in its way, a 

very peculiar thing - and had I space, and did I believe it would 

prove interesting to readers in general, I might write an essay on 

it, with instances - in which case the Address to the Scottish 

Clergy would come in for more notice, citation and application than 

it has yet received.  ut meanwhile ust tae this little snippet - 

very characteristic and very suggestive in its own way - and tell 

me whether it does not ustify and bear out fully what I have now 

said as illustrating a certain side and a strange uncertain 

limitation in Stevenson





"ut it is not alone in scenery and architecture that we count 

ngland foreign.  The constitution of society, the very pillars of 

the empire, surprise and even pain us.  The dull neglected peasant, 

sun in matter, insolent, gross and servile, maes a startling 

contrast to our own long-legged, long-headed, thoughtful, ible-

loving ploughman.  A wee or two in such a place as Suffol leaves 

the Scotsman gasping.  It seems impossible that within the 

boundaries of his own island a class should have been thus 

forgotten.  ven the educated and intelligent who hold our own 

opinions and spea in our own words, yet seem to hold them with a 

difference or from another reason, and to spea on all things with 

less interest and conviction.  The first shoc of nglish society 

is lie a cold plunge." ()





As there was a great deal of the "ohn ull element" (9) in the 

little dreamer De uincey, so there was a great deal, after all, of 

the rather conceited Calvinistic Scot in R. . Stevenson, and it is 

to be traced as clearly in certain of his fictions as anywhere, 

though he himself would not perhaps have seen it and acnowledged 

it, as I am here forced now to see it, and to acnowledge it for 

him.







CHATR II - RS  RTH







nce again I quote oethe



"atural simplicity and repose are the acme of art, and hence it 

follows no youth can be a master."  It has to be confessed that 

seldom, if ever, does Stevenson naturally and by sheer enthusiasm 

for subect and characters attain this natural simplicity, if he 

often attained the counterfeit presentment - artistic and graceful 

euphony, and new, subtle, and often unexpected concatenations of 

phrase.  Style is much but it is not everything.  e often love 

Scott the more that he shows loosenesses and lapses here, for, in 

spite of them, he gains natural simplicity, while not seldom 

Stevenson, with all his art and fine sense of verbal music, rather 

misses it.  TH SDS A sometimes disenchants as well as 

charms for occasionally a word, a touch, a turn, sends us off too 

directly in search of the model and this operates against the 

interest as introducing a new and alien series of associations, 

where, for full effect, it should not be so.  And this distraction 

will be the more insistent, the more nowledge the reader has and 

the more he remembers and since Stevenson's first appeal, both by 

his spirit and his methods, is to the cultured and well read, 

rather than to the great mass, his "sedulous apehood" only the more 

directly wars against him as regards deep, continuous, and lasting 

impression where he should be most simple, natural and 

spontaneous he also is most artificial and involved.  If the 

story-writer is not so much in earnest, not so possessed by his 

matter that this is allowed to him, how is it to be hoped that we 

shall be possessed in the reading of it  More than once in 

CATRIA we must own we had this experience, directly warring 

against full possession by the story, and certain passages about 

Simon ovat were especially mared by this if even the first 

introduction to Catriona herself was not so.  As for Miss arbara 

rant, of whom so much has been made by many admirers, she is 

decidedly clever, indeed too clever by half, and yet her doom is to 

be a mere DS  MACHIA, and never do more than ust pay a little 

tribute to Stevenson's own power of RSIA, or, if you lie, to 

pay a penalty, poor lass, for the too perfect doing of hat, and 

really, really, I could not help saying this much, though, I do 

believe that she deserved ust a wee bit better fate than that.



ut we have proofs of great growth, and nowhere are they greater 

than at the very close.  Stevenson died young  in some phases he 

was but a youth to the last.  To a true critic then, the problem 

is, having already attained so much - a grand style, grasp of a 

limited group of characters, with fancy, sincerity, and 

imagination, - what would Stevenson have attained in another ten 

years had such been but allotted him  It has over and over again 

been said that, for long he SHID presenting women altogether.  

This is not quite true  THRA AT was an earlier effort and if 

there the problem is persistent, the woman is real.  Here also he 

was on the right road - the advance road.  The sex-question was 

coming forward as inevitably a part of life, and could not be left 

out in any broad and true picture.  This element was effectively 

revived in IR  HRMIST, and "eir" has been well said to be 

sadder, if it does not go deeper than DIS DA or DI DRD.  

e now what Dicens and Thaceray could do there we can but guess 

now what Stevenson would have done.  "eir" is but a fragment but, 

to a wisely critical and unpreudiced mind, it suffices to show not 

only what the complete wor would have been, but what would have 

inevitably followed it.  It shows the turning-point, and the way 

that was to be followed at the cross-roads - the way into a bigger, 

realer, grander world, where realism, freed from the dream, and 

fancy, and preudice of youth, would glory in achieving the more 

enduring romance of manhood, maturity and humanity.



es there was growth - undoubted growth.  The questioning and 

severely moral element mainly due to the Shorter Catechism - the 

tendency to casuistry, and to problems, and wistful introspection - 

which had so coloured Stevenson's art up to the date of TH MASTR 

 AATRA, and made him a great essayist, was passing in the 

satisfaction of assured insight into life itself.  The art would 

gradually have been transformed also.  The problem, pure and 

simple, would have been subdued in face of the great facts of life 

if not lost, swallowed up in the grandeur, pathos, and awe of the 

tragedy clearly realised and presented.







CHATR III - ARIR DTRMIATIS AD RSTS







STS'S earlier determination was so distinctly to the 

symbolic, the parabolic, allegoric, dreamy and mystical - to 

treatment of the world as an array of weird or half-fanciful 

existences, witnessing only to certain dim spiritual facts or 

abstract moralities, occasionally inverted moralities - "tail 

foremost moralities" as later he himself named them - that a strong 

Celtic strain in him had been detected and dwelt on by acute 

critics long before any attention had been given to his genealogy 

on both sides of the house.  The strong Celtic strain is now amply 

attested by many researches.  Such phantasies as TH HS  D, 

TH TCHST, TH R THI, and TH S  TH MRR, 

published along with some fables at the end of an edition of DR 

 AD MR HD, by ongman's, I thin, in 19, tell to the 

initiated as forcibly as anything could tell of the presence of 

this element, as though moonshine, disguising and transfiguring, 

was laid over all real things and the secret of the world and life 

was in its glamour  the shimmering and soft shading rendering all 

outlines indeterminate, though a great idea is felt to be present 

in the mind of the author, for which he wors.  The man who would 

say there is no feeling for symbol - no phantasy or Celtic glamour 

in these weird, puling, and yet on all sides suggestive tales 

would thereby be declared inept, inefficient - blind to certain 

qualities that lie near to grandeur in fanciful literature, or the 

literature of phantasy, more properly.



This power in weird and playful phantasy is accompanied with the 

gift of impersonating or embodying mere abstract qualities or 

tendencies in characters.  The little early setch written in une 

15, titled D CTT, well illustrates this





"leasure goes by piping  Hope unfurls his purple flag and mee 

Content follows them on a snow-white ass.  Here, the broad sunlight 

falls on open ways and goodly countries here, stage by stage, 

pleasant old towns and hamlets border the road, now with high sign-

poles, now with high minster spires the lanes go burrowing under 

blossomed bans, green meadows, and deep woods encompass them 

about from wood to wood floc the glad birds the vane turns in 

the variable wind and as I ourney with Hope and leasure, and 

quite a company of olly personifications, who but the lady I love 

is by my side, and wals with her slim hand upon my arm



"Suddenly, at a corner, something becons a phantom finger-post, a 

will o' the wisp, a foolish challenge writ in big letters on a 

brand.  And twisting his red moustaches, braggadocio irtue taes 

the perilous way where dim rain falls ever, and sad winds sigh.  

And after him, on his white ass, follows simpering Content.



"ver since I wal behind these two in the rain.  irtue is all a-

cold limp are his curling feather and fierce moustache.  Sore 

besmirched, on his acass, follows Content."





The record, entitled SDA THHTS, which is dated some five days 

earlier is naive and most characteristic, touched with the 

phantastic moralities and suggestions already indicated in every 

sentence and rises to the fine climax in this respect at the 

close.





"A plague o' these Sundays  How the church bells ring up the 

sleeping past  I cannot go in to sermon  memories ache too hard 

and so I hide out under the blue heavens, beside the small ir 

whelmed in leaves.  Tittering country girls see me as I go past 

from where they sit in the pews, and through the open door comes 

the loud psalm and the fervent solitary voice of the preacher.  To 

and fro I wander among the graves, and now loo over one side of 

the platform and see the sunlit meadow where the grown lambs go 

bleating and the ewes lie in the shadow under their heaped fleeces 

and now over the other, where the rhododendrons flower fair among 

the chestnut boles, and far overhead the chestnut lifts its thic 

leaves and spiry blossom into the dar-blue air.  h, the height 

and depth and thicness of the chestnut foliage  h, to have wings 

lie a dove, and dwell in the tree's green heart



. . . . . . . .



"A plague o' these Sundays  How the Church bells ring up the 

sleeping past  Here has a maddening memory broen into my brain.  

To the door, to the door, with the naed lunatic thought  nce it 

is forth we may tal of what we dare not entertain once the 

intriguing thought has been put to the door I can watch it out of 

the loophole where, with its fellows, it raves and threatens in 

dumb show.  ears ago when that thought was young, it was dearer to 

me than all others, and I would spea with it always when I had an 

hour alone.  These rags that so dismally tric forth its madness 

were once the splendid livery my favour wrought for it on my bed at 

night.  Can you see the device on the badge  I dare not read it 

there myself, yet have a guess - 'AD AR ICHT' - is not that the 

humour of it



. . . . . . . . .



"A plague o' these Sundays  How the Church bells ring up the 

sleeping past  If I were a dove and dwelt in the monstrous 

chestnuts, where the bees murmur all day about the flowers if I 

were a sheep and lay on the field there under my comely fleece if 

I were one of the quiet dead in the iryard - some homespun farmer 

dead for a long age, some dull hind who followed the plough and 

handled the sicle for threescore years and ten in the distant 

past if I were anything but what I am out here, under the sultry 

noon, between the deep chestnuts, among the graves, where the 

fervent voice of the preacher comes to me, thin and solitary, 

through the open windows I I R HAT I AS STRDA, AD HAT, 

R D, I SHA  AAI T-MRR, H SHD I TAC THS 

RA MMRIS, H I D THIS CA RSRRCTI  DAD 

HS"





Close associated with this always is the moralising faculty, which 

is assertive.  Tae here the cunning sentences on SISHSS AD 

TISM, very Hawthornian yet quite original





"An unconscious, easy, selfish person shocs less, and is more 

easily loved, than one who is laboriously and egotistically 

unselfish.  There is at least no fuss about the first but the 

other parades his sacrifices, and so sells his favours too dear.  

Selfishness is calm, a force of nature you might say the trees 

were selfish.  ut egotism is a piece of vanity it must always 

tae you into its confidence it is uneasy, troublesome, seeing 

it can do good, but not handsomely it is uglier, because less 

dignified, than selfishness itself."





If Mr Henley had but had this clear in his mind he might well have 

quoted it in one connection against Stevenson himself in the A 

MA MAAI article.  He could hardly have quoted anything more 

apparently apt to the purpose.



In the sphere of minor morals there is no more important topic.  

nselfishness is too often only the most exasperating form of 

selfishness.  Here is another very characteristic bit





"ou will always do wrong  you must try to get used to that, my 

son.  It is a small matter to mae a wor about, when all the world 

is in the same case.  I meant when I was a young man to write a 

great poem and now I am cobbling little prose articles and in 

excellent good spirits.  I than you. . . . ur business in life is 

not to succeed, but to continue to fail, in good spirits."





Again





"It is the mar of good action that it appears inevitable in the 

retrospect.  e should have been cut-throats to do otherwise.  And 

there's an end.  e ought to now distinctly that we are damned for 

what we do wrong but when we have done right, we have only been 

gentlemen, after all.  There is nothing to mae a wor about."





The moral to TH HS  D is incisive writ out of true 

experience - phantasy there becomes solemn, if not, for the nonce, 

tragic-





"ld is the tree and the fruit good,

ery old and thic the wood.

oodman, is your courage stout

eware the root is wrapped about

our mother's heart, your father's bones

And, lie the mandrae, comes with groans."





The phantastic moralist is supreme, auntily serious, facetiously 

earnest, most gravely funny in the whole series of MRA MMS.





"Reader, your soul upraise to see,

In yon fair cut designed by me,

The pauper by the highwayside

ainly soliciting from pride.

Mar how the eau with easy air

Contemns the anxious rustic's prayer

And casting a disdainful eye

oes gaily gallivanting by.

He from the poor averts his head . . .

He will regret it when he's dead."





ow, the man who would trace out step by step and point by point, 

clearly and faithfully, the process by which Stevenson wored 

himself so far free of this his besetting tendency to moralised 

symbolism or allegory into the freer air of life and real 

character, would do more to throw light on Stevenson's genius, and 

the obstacles he had had to contend with in becoming a novelist 

eager to interpret definite times and character, than has yet been 

done or even faithfully attempted.  This would show at once 

Stevenson's wonderful growth and the saving grace and elasticity of 

his temperament and genius.  ew men who have by force of native 

genius gone into allegory or moralised phantasy ever depart out of 

that fateful and enchanted region.  They are as it were at once 

lost and imprisoned in it and ept there as by a spell - the more 

they struggle for freedom the more surely is the bewitching charm 

laid upon them - they are but lie the fly in amber.  It was so 

with udwig Tiec it was so with athaniel Hawthorne it was so 

with our own eorge MacDonald, whose professedly real pictures of 

life are all informed of this phantasy, which spoils them for what 

they profess to be, and yet to the discerning cannot disguise what 

they really are - the attempts of a mystic poet and phantasy writer 

and allegoristic moralist to wal in the ways of Anthony Trollope 

or of Mrs liphant, and, lie a stranger in a new land always 

looing bac (at least by a side-glance, an averted or half-averted 

face which eeps him from seeing steadily and seeing whole the real 

world with which now he is fain to deal), to the country from which 

he came.



Stevenson did largely free himself, that is his great achievement - 

had he lived, we verily believe, so mared was his progress, he 

would have been a great and true realist, a profound interpreter of 

human life and its tragic laws and wondrous compensations - he 

would have shown how to mae the full retreat from fairyland 

without penalty of too early an escape from it, as was the case 

with Thomas the Rymer of rcildoune, and with one other told of by 

him, and proved that to have been a dreamer need not absolutely 

close the door to insight into the real world and to art.  This 

side of the subect, never even glanced at by Mr Henley or Mr 

angwill or their CRRS, yet demands, and will well reward the 

closest and most careful attention and thought that can be given to 

it.



The parabolic element, with the whimsical humour and turn for 

paradoxical inversion, comes out fully in such a wor as DR  

AD MR HD.  There his humour gives body to his fancy, and reality 

to the half-whimsical forms in which he embodies the results of 

deep and earnest speculations on human nature and motive.  ut even 

when he is professedly concerned with incident and adventure 

merely, he manages to communicate to his pages some touch of 

universality, as of unconscious parable or allegory, so that the 

reader feels now and then as though some thought, or motive, or 

aspiration, or weaness of his own were being there cunningly 

unveiled or presented and not seldom you feel he has also unveiled 

and presented some of yours, secret and unacnowledged too.



Hence the interest which young and old alie have felt in TRASR 

ISAD, IDAD, and TH RCR - a something which suffices 

decisively to mar off these boos from the mass with which 

superficially they might be classed.







CHATR I - DMD CARC STDMA'S STIMAT







It should be clearly remembered that Stevenson died at a little 

over forty - the age at which severity and simplicity and breadth 

in art but begin to be attained.  If Scott had died at the age when 

Stevenson was taen from us, the world would have laced the 

AR S if a lie fate had overtaen Dicens, we should 

not have had A TA  T CITIS and under a similar stroe, 

oldsmith could not have written RTAIATI, or tasted the bitter-

sweet first night of SH STS T CR.  At the age of forty-

four Mr Thomas Hardy had probably not dreamt of TSS  TH 

D'RRIS.  ut what a man has already done at forty years is 

liely, I am afraid, to be a gauge as well as a promise of what he 

will do in the future and from Stevenson we were entitled to 

expect perfect form and continued variety of subect, rather than a 

measurable dynamic gain.



This is the point of view which my friend and correspondent of 

years ago, Mr dmund Clarence Stedman, of ew or, set out by 

emphasising in his address, as resident of the meeting under the 

auspices of the ncut eaves Society in ew or, in the beginning 

of 195, on the death of Stevenson, and to honour the memory of the 

great romancer, as reported in the  R TRI





"e are brought together by tidings, almost from the Antipodes, of 

the death of a beloved writer in his early prime.  The wor of a 

romancer and poet, of a man of insight and feeling, which may be 

said to have begun but fifteen years ago, has ended, through 

fortune's sternest cynicism, ust as it seemed entering upon even 

more splendid achievement.  A star surely rising, as we thought, 

has suddenly gone out.  A radiant invention shines no more the 

voice is hushed of a creative mind, expressing its fine imagining 

in this, our peerless nglish tongue.  His expression was so 

original and fresh from ature's treasure-house, so prodigal and 

various, its too brief flow so consummate through an inborn gift 

made perfect by unsparing toil, that mastery of the art by which 

Robert ouis Stevenson conveyed those imaginings to us so 

picturesque, yet wisely ordered, his own romantic life - and now, 

at last, so pathetic a loss which renews



"'The irgilian cry,

The sense of tears in mortal things,'



that this assemblage has gathered at the first summons, in tribute 

to a beautiful genius, and to avow that with the putting out of 

that bright intelligence the reading world experiences a more than 

wonted grief.



"udged by the sum of his interrupted wor, Stevenson had his 

limitations.  ut the wor was adusted to the scale of a possibly 

long career.  As it was, the good fairies brought all gifts, save 

that of health, to his cradle, and the gift-spoiler wrapped them in 

a shroud.  Thining of what his art seemed leading to - for things 

that would be the crowning efforts of other men seemed prentice-

wor in his case - it was not safe to bound his limitations.  And 

now it is as if Sir alter, for example, had died at forty-four, 

with the AR S ust begun  In originality, in the 

conception of action and situation, which, however phantastic, are 

seemingly within reason, once we breathe the air of his ancyland 

in the union of bracing and heroic character and adventure in all 

that belongs to tale-writing pure and simple, his gift was 

exhaustless.  o other such charmer, in this wise, has appeared in 

his generation.  e thought the stories, the fairy tales, had all 

been told, but 'nce upon a time' meant for him our own time, and 

the grave and gay magic of rince loriel in dingy ondon or sunny 

rance.  All this is but one of his provinces, however distinctive.  

esides, how he buttressed his romance with apparent truth  Since 

Defoe, none had a better right to say  'There was one thing I 

determined to do when I began this long story, and that was to tell 

out everything as it befell.'



"I remember delighting in two fascinating stories of aris in the 

time of rancois illon, anonymously reprinted by a ew or paper 

from a ondon magaine.  They had all the quality, all the 

distinction, of which I spea.  Shortly afterward I met Mr 

Stevenson, then in his twenty-ninth year, at a ondon club, where 

we chanced to be the only loungers in an upper room.  To my 

surprise he opened a conversation - you now there could be nothing 

more unexpected than that in ondon - and thereby I guessed that he 

was as much, if not as far, away from home as I was.  He ased many 

questions concerning 'the States' in fact, this was but a few 

months before he too his steerage passage for our shores.  I was 

drawn to the young Scotsman at once.  He seemed more lie a ew-

nglander of Holmes's rahmin caste, who might have come from 

Harvard or ale.  ut as he grew animated I thought, as others have 

thought, and as one would suspect from his name, that he must have 

Scandinavian blood in his veins - that he was of the heroic, 

restless, strong and tender iing strain, and certainly from that 

day his wors and wanderings have not belied the surmise.  He told 

me that he was the author of that charming boo of gipsying in the 

Cevennes which ust then had gained for him some attentions from 

the literary set.  ut if I had nown that he had written those two 

stories of sixteenth-century aris - as I learned afterwards when 

they reappeared in the  ARAIA IHTS - I would not have bidden 

him good-bye as to an 'unfledged comrade,' but would have wished 

indeed to 'grapple him to my soul with hoos of steel.'



"Another point is made clear as crystal by his life itself.  He had 

the instinct, and he had the courage, to mae it the servant, and 

not the master, of the faculty within him.  I say he had the 

courage, but so potent was his birth-spell that doubtless he could 

not otherwise.  othing commonplace sufficed him.  A regulation 

stay-at-home life would have been fatal to his art.  The ancient 

mandate, 'ollow thy enius,' was well obeyed.  nshacled freedom 

of person and habit was a prerequisite as an imaginary artist he 

felt - nature eeps her poets and story-tellers children to the 

last - he felt, if he ever reasoned it out, that he must gang his 

own gait, whether it seemed promising, or the reverse, to ith, 

in, or alien.  So his wanderings were not only in the most natural 

but in the wisest consonance with his creative dreams.  herever he 

went, he found something essential for his use, breathed upon it, 

and returned it fourfold in beauty and worth.  The longing of the 

orseman for the tropic, of the pine for the palm, too him to the 

South Seas.  There, too, strange secrets were at once revealed to 

him, and every island became an 'Isle of oices.'  es, an 

additional proof of Stevenson's artistic mission lay in his 

careless, careful, liberty of life in that he was an artist no 

less than in his wor.  He trusted to the impulse which possessed 

him - that which so many of us have conscientiously disobeyed and 

too late have found ourselves in reputable bondage to 

circumstances.



"ut those whom you are waiting to hear will spea more fully of 

all this - some of them with the interest of their personal 

remembrance - with the strength of their affection for the man 

beloved by young and old.  In the strange and sudden intimacy with 

an author's record which death maes sure, we realise how notable 

the list of Stevenson's wors produced since 1 more than a 

score of boos - not fiction alone, but also essays, criticism, 

biography, drama, even history, and, as I need not remind you, that 

spontaneous poetry which comes only from a true poet.  one can 

have failed to observe that, having recreated the story of 

adventure, he seemed in his later fiction to interfuse a subtler 

purpose - the search for character, the analysis of mind and soul.  

ust here his summons came.  etween the sunrise of one day and the 

sunset of the next he exchanged the forest study for the mountain 

grave.  There, as he had sung his own wish, he lies 'under the wide 

and starry sy.'  If there was something of his own romance, so 

exquisitely capricious, in the life of Robert ouis Stevenson, so, 

also, the poetic conditions are satisfied in his death, and in the 

choice of his burial-place upon the top of ala.  As for the 

splendour of that maturity upon which we counted, now never to be 

fulfilled on sea or land, I say - as once before, when the great 

ew-ngland romancer passed in the stillness of the night





"'hat though his wor unfinished lies  Half bent

The rainbow's arch fades out in upper air,

The shining cataract half-way down the height

reas into mist the haunting strain, that fell

n listeners unaware,

nds incomplete, but through the starry night

The ear still waits for what it did not tell.'"





Dr dward ggleston finely sounded the personal note, and told of 

having met Stevenson at a hotel in ew or.  Stevenson was ill 

when the landlord came to Dr ggleston and ased him if he should 

lie to meet him.  Continuing, he said





"He was flat on his bac when I entered, but I thin I never saw 

anybody grow well in so short a time.  It was a soul rather than a 

body that lay there, ablae with spiritual fire, good will shining 

through everywhere.  He did not pay me any compliment about my 

wor, and I didn't pay him any about his.  e did not burn any of 

the incense before each other which authors so often thin it 

necessary to do, but we were friends instantly.  I am not given to 

speedy intimacies, but I could not help my heart going out to him.  

It was a wonderfully invested soul, no hedges or fences across his 

fields, no concealment.  He was a romanticist I was - well, I 

don't now exactly what.  ut he let me into the springs of his 

romanticism then and there.



"'ou go in your boat every day' he ased.  'ou sail  h to 

write a novel a man must tae his life in his hands.  He must not 

live in the town.'  And so he spoe, in his broad way, of course, 

according to the enthusiasm of the moment.



"I can't sound any note of pathos here to-night.  Some lives are so 

brave and sweet and oyous and well-rounded, with such a 

completeness about them that death does not leave imperfection.  He 

never had the air of sitting up with his own reputation.  He let 

his boos toss in the waves of criticism and mae their ports if 

they deserve to.  He had no claptrap, no great cause, none of the 

disease of pruriency which came into fashion with laubert and uy 

de Maupassant.  He simply told his story, with no condescension, 

taing the readers into his heart and his confidence."







CHATR  - TISTIC MT AD ITS CTS







RM these sources now traced out by us - his youthfulness of 

spirit, his mystical bias, and tendency to dream - symbolisms 

leading to disregard of common feelings - flows too often the 

indeterminateness of Stevenson's wor, at the very points where for 

direct interest there should be decision.  In TH MASTR  

AATRA this leads him to try to bring the balances even as 

regards our interest in the two brothers, in so far ustifying from 

one point of view what Mr angwill said in the quotation we have 

given, or, as Sir eslie Stephen had it in his second series of the 

STDIS  A IRAHR





"The younger brother in TH MASTR  AATRA, who is blac-

mailed by the utterly reprobate master, ought surely to be 

interesting instead of being simply sullen and dogged.  In the 

later adventures, we are invited to forgive him on the ground that 

his brain has been affected  but the impression upon me is that he 

is sacrificed throughout to the interests of the story [or more 

strictly for the woring out of the problem as originally conceived 

by the author].  The curious exclusion of women is natural in the 

purely boyish stories, since to a boy woman is simply an 

incumbrance upon reasonable modes of life.  hen in CATRIA 

Stevenson introduces a love story, it is still unsatisfactory, 

because David alfour is so much the undeveloped animal that his 

passion is clumsy, and his charm for the girl unintelligible.  I 

cannot feel, to say the truth, that in any of these stories I am 

really among living human beings with whom, apart from their 

adventures, I can feel any very lively affection or antipathy."





In the -TID it is, in this respect, yet worse  the three 

heroes choe each other off all too literally.



In his excess of impartiality he tones down the points and lines 

that would give the attraction of true individuality to his 

characters, and instead, would fain have us contented with his 

liberal, and even over-sympathetic views of them and allowances for 

them.  ut instead of thus furthering his obect, he sacrifices the 

whole - and his story becomes, instead of a broad and faithful 

human record, really a curiosity of autobiographic perversion, and 

of overweening, if not extravagant egotism of the more refined, but 

yet over-obtrusive ind.



Mr aildon thus hits the subective tendency, out of which mainly 

this defect - a serious defect in view of interest - arises.





"That we can none of us be sure to what crime we might not descend, 

if only our temptation were sufficiently acute, lies at the root of 

his fondness and toleration for wrong-doers (p. 4).





Thus he practically declines to do for us what we are unwilling or 

unable to do for ourselves.  Interest in two characters in fiction 

can never, in this artificial way, and if they are real characters 

truly conceived, be made equal, nor can one element of claim be 

balanced against another, even at the bec of the greatest artist.  

The common sentiment, as we have seen, resents it even as it 

resents lac of guidance elsewhere.  After all, the novelist is 

bound to give guidance  he is an authority in his own world, where 

he is an autocrat indeed and can wor out issues as he pleases, 

even as the ope is an authority in the Roman Catholic world  he 

abdicates his functions when he declines to lead  we depend on him 

from the human point of view to guide us right, according to the 

heart, if not according to any conventional notion or opinion.  

Stevenson's pause in individual presentation in the desire now to 

raise our sympathy for the one, and then for the other in TH 

MASTR  AATRA, admits us too far into Stevenson's secret or 

tric of affected self-withdrawal in order to wor his problem and 

to signify his theories, to the loss and utter confusion of his 

aims from the point of common dramatic and human interest.  It is 

the same in CATRIA in much of the treatment of ames Mohr or 

More it is still more so in not a little of the treatment of IR 

 HRMIST and his son, though there, happily for him and for us, 

there were the direct restrictions of nown fact and history, and 

clearly an attempt at a truer and broader human conception 

unburdened by theory or egotistic conception.



verywhere the problem due to the desire to be overust, so to say, 

emerges and exactly in the measure it does so the source of true 

dramatic directness and variety is lost.  It is ust as though 

Shaespeare were to invent a chorus to cry out at intervals about 

Iago - "a villain, bad lot, you see, still there's a great deal to 

be said for him - victim of inheritance, this, that and the other 

and considering everything how could you really expect anything 

else now."  Thaceray was often wea from this same tendency - he 

meant ecy Sharp to be largely excused by the reader on these 

grounds, as he tries to excuse several others of his characters 

but his endeavours in this way to gloss over "wicedness" in a way, 

do not succeed - the reader does not carry clear in mind as he goes 

along, the suggestions Thaceray has ineffectually set out and the 

"healthy hatred of scoundrels" Carlyle taled about has its full 

play in spite of Thaceray's suggested excuses and palliations, and 

all in his own favour, too, as a story-wright.



Stevenson's constant habit of putting himself in the place of 

another, and asing himself how would I have borne myself here or 

there, thus limited his field of dramatic interest, where the 

subect should have been made pre-eminently in aid of this effect.  

ven in ong ohn Silver we see it, as in various others of his 

characters, though there, owing to the demand for adventure, and 

action contributory to it, the defect is not so emphasised.  The 

sense as of a proection of certain features of the writer into all 

and sundry of his important characters, thus imparts, if not an air 

of egotism, then most certainly a somewhat constrained, if not 

somewhat artificial, autobiographical air - in the very midst of 

action, questions of ethical or casuistical character arise, all 

contributing to submerging individual character and its dramatic 

interests under a wave of but half-disguised autobiography.  et 

Stevenson do his very best - let him adopt all the artificial 

disguises he may, as writing narrative in the first person, etc., 

as in IDAD and CATRIA, nevertheless, the attentive reader's 

mind is constantly called off to the man who is actually writing 

the story.  It is as though, after all, all the artistic or 

artificial disguises were a mere mas, as more than once Thaceray 

represented himself, the mas partially moved aside, ust enough to 

show a chubby, childish ind of transformed Thaceray face below.  

This belongs, after all, to the order of self-revelation though 

under many disguises  it is creation only in its manner of wor, 

not in its essential being - the spirit does not so to us go clean 

forth of itself, it stops at home, and, as if from a remote and 

shadowy cave or recess, proects its own colour on all on which it 

loos.



This is essentially the character of the MSTIC and hence the 

ustification for this word as applied expressly to Stevenson by Mr 

Chesterton and others.





"The inner life lie rings of light

oes forth of us, transfiguring all we see."





The effect of these early days, with the peculiar tint due to the 

questionings raised by religious stress and strain, persists with 

Stevenson he grows, but he never escapes from that peculiar 

something which tells of childish influences - of boyish 

perversions and troubled self-examinations due to Shorter Catechism 

- any one who would view Stevenson without thought of this, would 

view him only from the outside - see him merely in dress and outer 

oddities.  Here I see definite and clear heredity.  Much as he 

differed from his worthy father in many things, he was lie him in 

this - the old man lie the son, bore on him the mars of early 

excesses of wistful self-questionings and painful wrestlings with 

religious problems, that perpetuated themselves in a quaint ind of 

self-revelation often mased by an assumed self-withdrawal or 

indifference which to the een eye only the more revealed the real 

case.  Stevenson never, any more than his father, ceased to be 

interested in the religious questions for which Scotland has always 

had a CHAT - and so much is this the case that I could wish 

rofessor Sidney Colvin would even yet attempt to show the bearing 

of certain things in that ADDRSS T TH SCTTISH CR written 

when Stevenson was yet but a young man, on all that he afterwards 

said and did.  It starts in the DIRH DITI without any note, 

comment, or explanation whatever, but in that respect the DIRH 

DITI is not quite so complete as it might have been made.  In 

view of the point now before us, it is far more important than many 

of the other trifles there given, and wants explanation and its 

relation to much in the novels brought out and illustrated.  ere 

this adequately done, only new ground would be got for holding that 

Stevenson, instead of, as has been said, "seeing only the visible 

world," was, in truth, a mystical moralist, once and always, whose 

thoughts ran all too easily into parable and fable, and who, 

indeed, never escaped wholly from that atmosphere, even when 

writing of things and characters that seemed of themselves to be 

wholly outside that sphere.  This was the tendency, indeed, that 

militated against the complete detachment in his case from moral 

problems and mystical thought, so as to enable him to paint, as it 

were, with a free hand exactly as he saw and most certainly not 

that he saw only the visible world.  The mystical element is not 

directly favourable to creative art.  ou see in Tolstoy how it 

arrests and perplexes - how it lays a disturbing chec on real 

presentation - hindering the action, and is not favourable to the 

loving and faithful representation, which, as oethe said, all true 

and high art should be.  To some extent you see exactly the same 

thing in athaniel Hawthorne as in Tolstoy.  Hawthorne's 

preoccupations in this way militated against his character-power 

his healthy characters who would never have been influenced as he 

describes by morbid ones yet are not only influenced according to 

him, but suffer sadly.  hoebe yncheon in TH HS  TH S 

AS, gives sunshine to poor Hepibah Clifford, but is herself 

never merry again, though oyousness was her natural element.  So, 

doubtless, it would have been with ansie in DCTR DIR, as 

indeed it was with enobia and with the hero in the MAR A.  

"e all go wrong," said Hawthorne, "by a too strenuous resolution 

to go right."  ady yron was to him an intolerably irreproachable 

person, ust as Stevenson felt a little of the same towards 

Thoreau notwithstanding that he was the "sunnily-ascetic," the 

asceticism and its corollary, as he puts it  the passion for 

individual self-improvement was alien in a way to Stevenson.  This 

is the position of the casuistic mystic moralist and not of the man 

who sees only the visible world.



Mr aildon says





"Stevenson has many of the things that are wanting or defective in 

Scott.  He has his philosophy of life he is beyond remedy a 

moralist, even when his morality is of the ind which he happily 

calls 'tail foremost,' or as we may say, inverted morality.  

Stevenson is, in fact, much more of a thiner than Scott, and he is 

also much more of the conscious artist, questionable advantage as 

that sometimes is.  He has also a much cleverer, acuter mind than 

Scott, also a questionable advantage, as genius has no greater 

enemy than cleverness, and there is really no greater descent than 

to fall from the style of genius to that of cleverness.  ut 

Stevenson was too critical and alive to misuse his cleverness, and 

it is generally employed with great effect as in the diabolical 

ingenuities of a ohn Silver, or a Master of allantrae.  In one 

sense Stevenson does not even belong to the school of Scott, but 

rather to that of oe, Hawthorne, and the rontes, in that he aims 

more at concentration and intensity, than at the easy, quiet 

breadth of Scott."





If, indeed, it should not here have been added that Stevenson's 

theory of life and conduct was not seldom too insistent for free 

creativeness, for dramatic freedom, breadth and reality.



ow here I humbly thin Mr aldion errs about the cleverness when 

he criticises Stevenson for the A AS artistically of resorting 

to the piratic filibustering and the treasure-seeing at the close 

of TH MASTR  AATRA, he only tells and tells plainly how 

cleverness too the place of genius there as indeed it did in not 

a few cases - certainly in some points in the Dutch escapade in 

CATRIA and in not a few in DR  AD MR HD.  The fault of 

that last story is simply that we seem to hear Stevenson chucling 

to himself, "Ah, now, won't they all say at last how clever I am."  

That too mars the MRR M, whoever wrote them or part wrote them, 

and RIC TT would have been irretrievably spoiled by this self-

conscious sense of cleverness had it not been for style and 

artifice.  In this incessant "see how clever I am," we have another 

proof of the abounding youthfulness of R. . Stevenson.  If, as Mr 

aildon says (p. 3), he had true child's horror of being put in 

fine clothes in which one must sit still and be good, RIC TT 

remains attractive in spite of some things and because of his fine 

clothes.  either oe nor Hawthorne could have fallen to the 

piracy, and treasure-hunting of TH MASTR  AATRA.



"ar behind Scott in the power of instinctive, irreflective, 

spontaneous creation of character, Stevenson tells his story with 

more art and with a firmer grip on his reader."  And that is 

exactly what I, wishing to do all I dutifully can for Stevenson, 

cannot see.  His genius is in nearly all cases pulled up or spoiled 

by his all too conscious cleverness, and at last we say, "h 

Heavens if he could and would but let himself go or forget himself 

what he might achieve."  ut he doesn't - never does, and therefore 

remains but a second-rate creator though more and more the stylist 

and the artist.  This is more especially the case at the very 

points where writers lie Scott would have risen and roused all the 

readers' interest.  hen Stevenson reaches such points, he is 

always as though saying "See now how cleverly I'll clear that old 

and stereotyped style of thing and do something ."  ut there 

are things in life and human nature, which though they are old are 

yet ever new, and the true greatness of a writer can never come 

from evading or looing asance at them or trying to mae them out 

something else than what they really are.  o artistic aim or 

ambition can suffice to stand instead of them or to refine them 

away.  That way lies only cold artifice and frigid lacewor, and 

sometimes Stevenson did go a little too much on this line.







CHATR I - IT I STS'S STRIS







TH unity in Stevenson's stories is generally a unity of subective 

impression and reminiscence due, in the first place, to his quic, 

almost abnormal boyish reverence for mere animal courage, audacity, 

and doggedness, and, in the second place, to his theory of life, 

his philosophy, his moral view.  He produces an artificial 

atmosphere.  verything then has to be wored up to this - ept 

really in accordance with it, and he shows great art in the doing 

of this.  Hence, though, a quaint sense of sameness, of artificial 

atmosphere - at once really a lac of spontaneity and of freedom.  

He is freest when he pretends to nothing but adventure - when he 

aims professedly at nothing save to let his characters develop 

themselves by action.  In this respect the most successful of his 

stories is yet TRASR ISAD, and the least successful perhaps 

CATRIA, when ust as the ambitious aim compels him to pause in 

incident, the first-person form creates a cold stiffness and 

artificiality alien to the full impression he would produce upon 

the reader.  The two stories he left unfinished promised far 

greater things in this respect than he ever accomplished.  or it 

is an indisputable fact, and indeed very remarable, that the 

ordinary types of men and women have little or no attraction for 

Stevenson, nor their commonplace passions either.  et precisely 

what his art wanted was due infusion of this very interest.  

othing else will supply the place.  The ordinary passion of love 

to the end he SHIS, and must invent no end of expedients to supply 

the want.  The devotion of the ordinary type, as Thomas Hardy has 

over and over exhibited it, is precisely what Stevenson wants, to 

impart to his novels the full sense of reality.  The secret of 

morals, says Shelley, is a going out of self.  Stevenson was only 

on the way to secure this grand and all-sufficing motive.  His 

characters, in a way, are all already lie himself, romantic, but 

the highest is when the ordinary and commonplace is so apprehended 

that it becomes romantic, and may even, through the artist's deeper 

perception and unconscious grasp and vision, tae the hand of 

tragedy, and lose nothing.  The very atmosphere Stevenson so loved 

to create was in itself alien to this and, so far as he went, his 

most successful revelations were but records of his own 

limitations.  It is something that he was to the end so much the 

youth, with fine impulses, if sometimes with sympathies 

misdirected, and that, too, in such a way as to render his wor 

cold and artificial, else he might have turned out more of the 

Swift than of the Sterne or ielding.  rince tto and Seraphina 

are from this cause mainly complete failures, alie from the point 

of view of nature and of art, and the Countess von Rosen is not a 

complete failure, and would perhaps have been a bit of a success, 

if only she had made rince tto come nearer to losing his virtue.  

The most perfect in style, perhaps, of all Stevenson's efforts it 

is yet most out of nature and truth, - a farce, felt to be 

disguised only when read in a certain mood and this all the more 

for its perfections, ust as Stevenson would have said it of a 

human being too icily perfect whom he had met.



n this subect, Mr aildon has some words so decisive, true, and 

final, that I cannot refrain from here quoting them





"rom sheer incapacity to retain it, rince tto loses the regard, 

affection, and esteem of his wife.  He goes eavesdropping among the 

peasantry, and has to sit silent while his wife's honour is 

coarsely impugned.  After that I hold it is impossible for 

Stevenson to rehabilitate his hero, and, with all his brilliant 

effects, he fails. . . . I cannot help feeling a regret that such 

fine wor is thrown away on what I must honestly hold to be an 

unworthy subect.  The music of the spheres is rather too sublime 

an accompaniment for this genteel comedy rincess.  A touch of 

ffenbach would seem more appropriate.  Then even in comedy the 

hero must not be the butt."  And it must reluctantly be confessed 

that in rince tto you see in excess that to which there is a 

tendency in almost all the rest - it is to mae up for lac of hold 

on human nature itself, by resources of style and mere external 

technical art.







CHATR II - RSA CHRSS AD ITD M







, it is in its own way surely a very remarable thing that 

Stevenson, who, lie a youth, was all for HITRIT, cheerfulness, 

taing and giving of pleasure, for relief, change, variety, new 

impressions, new sensations, should, at the time he did, have 

conceived and written a story lie TH MASTR  AATRA - all 

in a grave, grey, sombre tone, not aiming even generally at what at 

least indirectly all art is conceived to aim at - the giving of 

pleasure  he himself decisively said that it "laced all 

pleasurableness, and hence was imperfect in essence."  A very 

strange utterance in face of the oft-repeated doctrine of the 

essays that the one aim of art, as of true life, is to communicate 

pleasure, to cheer and to elevate and improve, and in face of two 

of his doctrines that life itself is a monitor to cheerfulness and 

mirth.  This is true  and it is only explainable on the ground 

that it is youth alone which can exult in its power of accumulating 

shadows and dwelling on the dar side - it is youth that revels in 

the possible as a set-off to its brightness and irresponsibility  

it is youth that can delight in its own excess of shade, and can 

even dispense with sunshine - hugging to its heart the memory of 

its own often self-created distresses and conuring up and, with 

self-satisfaction, brooding over the pain and imagined horrors of a 

lifetime.  Maturity and age indly bring their own relief - 

rendering this ind of ministry to itself no longer desirable, even 

were it possible.  TH MASTR  AATRA indeed mars the 

crisis.  It shows, and effectively shows, the other side of the 

adventure passion - the desire of escape from its own sombre 

introspections, which yet, in all its "go" and glow and glitter, 

tells by its very excess of their tendency to pass into this other 

and apparently opposite.  ut here, too, there is nothing single or 

separate.  The device of piracy, etc., at close of AATRA, is 

one of the poorest expedients for relief in all fiction.



ill in I ' TH MI presents another.  hen at the last moment 

he decides that it is not worth while to get married, the author's 

then rather incontinent philosophy - which, by-the-bye, he did not 

himself act on - spoils his story as it did so much else.  Such an 

ending to such a romance is worse even than any blundering such as 

the commonplace inventor could be guilty of, for he would be in a 

low sense natural if he were but commonplace.  e need not 

therefore be surprised to find Mr wynn thus writing





"The love scenes in IR  HRMIST are almost unsurpassable but 

the central interest of the story lies elsewhere - in the relations 

between father and son.  hatever the cause, the fact is clear that 

in the last years of his life Stevenson recognised in himself an 

ability to treat subects which he had hitherto avoided, and was 

thus no longer under the necessity of detaching fragments from 

life.  efore this, he had largely confined himself to the 

adventures of roving men where women had made no entrance or, if 

he treated of a settled family group, the result was what we see in 

TH MASTR  AATRA."





In a word, between this wor and IR  HRMIST we have the 

passage from mere youth to manhood, with its wider, calmer views, 

and its patience, inclusiveness, and mild, genial acceptance of 

types that before did not come, and could not by any effort of will 

be brought, within range or made to adhere consistently with what 

was already accepted and worable.  He was less the egotist now and 

more the realist.  He was not so prone to the high lights in which 

all seems overwrought, exaggerated concerned really with effects 

of a more subdued order, if still the theme was a wee out of 

ordinary nature.  nough is left to prove that Stevenson's life-

long devotion to his art anyway was on the point of being rewarded 

by such a success as he had always dreamt of  that in the man's 

nature there was power to conceive scenes of a tragic beauty and 

intensity unsurpassed in our prose literature, and to create 

characters not unworthy of his greatest predecessors.  The blind 

stroe of fate had nothing to say to the lesson of his life, and 

though we deplore that he never completed his masterpieces, we may 

at least be thanful that time enough was given him to prove to his 

fellow-craftsmen, that such labour for the sae of art is not 

without art's peculiar reward - the triumph of successful 

execution.







CHATR III - DIRH RIRS' DICTA IAICA T ATR 

R







RM many different points of view discerning critics have 

celebrated the autobiographic vein - the self-revealing turn, the 

self-portraiture, the quaint, genial, yet really child-lie 

egotistic and even dreamy element that lies lie an amalgam, behind 

all Stevenson's wor.  Some have even said, that because of this, 

he will finally live by his essays and not by his stories.  That is 

extreme, and is not critically based or ustified, because, however 

true it may be up to a certain point, it is not true of Stevenson's 

quite latest fictions where we see a decided breaing through of 

the old limits, and an advance upon a new and a fresher and broader 

sphere of interest and character altogether.  ut these ideas set 

down truly enough at a certain date, or prior to a certain date, 

are wrong and falsely directed in view of Stevenson's latest wor 

and what it promised.  or instance, what a discerning and able 

writer in the DIRH RI of uly 195 said truly then was in 

great part utterly inapplicable to the whole of the wor of the 

last years, for in it there was grasp, wide and deep, of new 

possibilities - promise of clear insight, discrimination, and 

contrast of character, as well as firm hold of new and great human 

interest under which the egotistic or autobiographic vein was 

submerged or weaened.  The DIRH RIR wrote





"There was irresistible fascination in what it would be unfair to 

characterise as egotism, for it came natural to him to tal franly 

and easily of himself. . . . He could never have dreamed, lie 

epys, of locing up his confidence in a diary.  rom first to 

last, in inconsecutive essays, in the records of sentimental 

touring, in fiction and in verse, he has embodied the outer and the 

inner autobiography.  He discourses - he prattles - he almost 

babbles about himself.  He seems to have taen minute and habitual 

introspection for the chief study in his analysis of human nature, 

as a subect which was immediately in his reach, and would most 

surely serve his purpose.  e suspect much of the success of his 

novels was due to the fact that as he seied for a substructure on 

the scenery and situations which had impressed him forcibly, so in 

the characters of the most different types, there was always more 

or less of self-portraiture.  The subtle touch, eminently and 

unmistaably realistic, gave life to what might otherwise have 

seemed a lay-figure. . . . He hesitated again and again as to his 

destination and under mistaes, advice of friends, doubted his 

chances, as a story-writer, even after TRASR ISAD had enoyed 

its special success. . . . e venture to thin that, with his love 

of intellectual self-indulgence, had he found novel-writing really 

enoyable, he would never have doubted at all.  ut there comes in 

the difference between him and Scott, whom he condemns for the 

slovenliness of hasty wormanship.  Scott, in his best days, sat 

down to his des and let the swift pen tae its course in 

inspiration that seemed to come without an effort.  ven when 

raced with pains, and groaning in agony, the intellectual 

machinery was still driven at a high pressure by something that 

resembled an irrepressible instinct.  Stevenson can have had little 

or nothing of that inspiriting afflatus.  He did his painstaing 

wor conscientiously, thoughtfully he erased, he revised, and he 

was hard to satisfy.  In short, it was his weird - and he could not 

resist it - to set style and form before fire and spirit."







CHATR I - MR H'S SIT RRSIS







MR unfortunate still, as disturbing and preudicing a sane and 

true and disinterested view of Stevenson's claims, was that article 

of his erewhile "friend," Mr . . Henley, published on the 

appearance of the MMIR by Mr raham alfour, in the A MA 

MAAI.  It was well that Mr Henley there acnowledged franly 

that he wrote under a een sense of "grievance" - a most dangerous 

mood for the most soberly critical and self-restrained of men to 

write in, and that most certainly Mr . . Henley was not - and 

that he owned to having lost contact with, and recognition of the 

R. . Stevenson who went to America in 1, as he says, and never 

came bac again.  To do bare ustice to Stevenson it is clear that 

nowledge of that later Stevenson was essential - essential whether 

it was calculated to deepen sympathy or the reverse.  It goes 

without saying that the ouis he new and hobnobbed with, and 

nursed near by the ld risto ort in dinburgh could not be the 

same exactly as the ouis of Samoa and later years - to suppose so, 

or to expect so, would simply be to deny all room for growth and 

expansion.  It is clear that the . . Henley of those days was not 

the same as the . . Henley who indited that article, and if 

growth and further insight are to be allowed to Mr Henley and be 

pleaded as his ustification CM spite born of sense of grievance 

for such an onslaught, then clearly some allowance in the same 

direction must be made for Stevenson.  ne can hardly thin that in 

his case old affection and friendship had been so completely 

submerged, under feelings of grievance and paltry pique, almost 

always bred of grievances dwelt on and nursed, which it is 

especially bad for men of genius to acnowledge, and to mae a 

basis, as it were, for clearer nowledge, insight, and udgment.  

In other cases the pleading would simply amount to an immediate and 

complete arrest of udgment.  Mr Henley throughout writes as though 

whilst he had changed, and changed in points most essential, his 

erewhile friend remained exactly where he was as to literary 

position and product - the ouis who went away in 1 and never 

returned, had, as Mr . . Henley, most unfortunately for himself, 

would imply, retained the mastery, and the ouis who never came 

bac had made no progress, had not added an inch, not to say a 

cubit, to his statue, while Mr Henley remained I STAT , and 

was so only to be udged.  It is an instance of the imperfect 

sympathy which Charles amb finely celebrated - only here it is 

acnowledged, and the "imperfect sympathy" pled as a ground for 

claiming the full insight which only sympathy can secure.  If Mr 

Henley was fair to the ouis he new and loved, it is clear that he 

was and could only be unust to the ouis who went away in 1 and 

never came bac.





"At bottom Stevenson was an excellent fellow.  ut he was of his 

essence what the rench call RS.  He was, that is, 

incessantly and passionately interested in Stevenson.  He could not 

be in the same room with a mirror but he must invite its 

confidences every time he passed it to him there was nothing 

obvious in time and eternity, and the smallest of his discoveries, 

his most trivial apprehensions, were all by way of being 

revelations, and as revelations must be thrust upon the world he 

was never so much in earnest, never so well pleased (this were he 

happy or wretched), never so irresistible as when he wrote about 

himself.  ITHA, I H ATD A THI, H T ATR IT ITH A 

TIR CTMT  CSCS.  R THS, IDD, TH SHRTR 

CATCHISM AS R RARD T ASR S THAT HTHR H DID  

R I, H AS SA T CM T AASHD AD CHR."





otice here, how undiscerning the mentor becomes.  The words put in 

"italics," unqualified as they are, would fit and admirably cover 

the character of the greatest criminal.  They would do as they 

stand, for ainwright, for Dr Dodd, for Deeming, for eil Cream, 

for Canham Read, or for Dougal of Moat arm fame.  And then the 

touch that, in the Shorter Catechism, Stevenson would have found a 

cover or ustification for it somehow  This comes of writing under 

a een sense of grievance and how could this be truly said of one 

who was "at bottom an excellent fellow."  . Henley's ethics are 

about as clear-obscure as is his reading of character.  isten to 

him once again - more directly on the literary point.





"To tell the truth, his boos are none of mine I mean that if I 

wanted reading, I do not go for it to the DIRH DITI.  I am 

not interested in remars about morals in and out of letters.  I 

HA ID A  AD ARID I, and my opinions are my own.  S, 

I I CRA TH CHATMT  RMAC, I AS IT  IR M THA 

H, AD  IR S THA HIS  of SMD (say) and RAT 

CTATIS, of RDATT and D MRTAIT,  A RI MART 

and RA, of DAID CRID and A TA  T CITIS 

while if good writing and some other things be in my appetite, are 

there not always Halitt and amb - to say nothing of that globe of 

miraculous continents which is nown to us as Shaespeare  There 

is his style, you will say, and it is a fact that it is rare, and 

I TH AST times better, because much simpler than in the first.  

ut, after all, his style is so perfectly achieved that the 

achievement gets obvious  and when achievement gets obvious, is it 

not by way of becoming uninteresting  And is there not something 

to be said for the person who wrote that Stevenson always reminded 

him of a young man dressed the best he ever saw for the urlington 

Arcade (1)  Stevenson's wor in letters does not now tae me 

much, and I decline to enter on the question of his immortality 

since that, despite what any can say, will get itself settled soon 

or late, for all time.  o - when I care to thin of Stevenson it 

is not of R. . Stevenson - R. . Stevenson, the renowned, the 

accomplished - executing his difficult solo, but of the ewis that 

I new and loved, and wrought for, and wored with for so long.  

The successful man of letters does not greatly interest me.  I read 

his careful prayers and pass on, with the certainty that, well as 

they read, they were not written for print.  I learn of his 

nameless prodigalities, and recall some instances of conduct in 

another vein.  I remember, rather, the unmarried and irresponsible 

ewis the friend, the comrade, the CHARMR.  Truly, that last 

word, rench as it is, is the only one that is worthy of him.  I 

shall ever remember him as that.  The impression of his writings 

disappears the impression of himself and his tal is ever a 

possession. . . . orasmuch as he was primarily a taler, his 

printed wors, lie these of others after his ind, are but a sop 

for posterity.  A last dying speech and confession (as it were) to 

show that not for nothing were they held rare fellows in their 

day."





ust a month or two before Mr Henley's self-revealing article 

appeared in the A MA MAAI, Mr Chesterton, in the DAI 

S, with almost prophetic forecast, had said





"Mr Henley might write an excellent study of Stevenson, but it 

would only be of the Henleyish part of Stevenson, and it would show 

a distinct divergence from the finished portrait of Stevenson, 

which would be given by rofessor Colvin."





And it were indeed hard to reconcile some things here with what Mr 

Henley set down of individual wors many times in the SCTS AD 

ATIA SRR, and elsewhere, and in literary udgments as in 

some other things there should, at least, be general consistency, 

else the search for an honest man in the late years would be yet 

harder than it was when Diogenes looed out from his tub



Mr ames Douglas, in the STAR, in his half-playful and suggestive 

way, chose to put it as though he regarded the article in the A 

MA MAAI as a hoax, perpetrated by some clever, unscrupulous 

writer, intent on provoing both Mr Henley and his friends, and 

Stevenson's friends and admirers.  This called forth a letter from 

one signing himself "A over of R. . Stevenson," which is so good 

that we must give it here.





A ITRAR HA.

T TH DITR  TH STAR.



SIR - I fear that, despite the charitable scepticism of Mr Douglas, 

there is no doubt that Mr Henley is the perpetrator of the 

saddening Depreciation of Stevenson which has been published over 

his name.



hat openings there are for reprisals let Mr Henley's conscience 

tell him but permit me to remind him of two or three things which 

R. . Stevenson has written concerning . . Henley.



irst this scene in the infirmary at dinburgh



"(eslie) Stephen and I sat on a couple of chairs, and the poor 

fellow (Henley) sat up in his bed with his hair and beard all 

tangled, and taled as cheerfully as if he had been in a ing's 

palace, or the great ing's palace of the blue air.  He has taught 

himself two languages since he has been lying there.  I SHA TR 

T   S T HIM."



Secondly, this passage from Stevenson's dedication of IRIIS 

RIS to "My dear illiam rnest Henley"



"These papers are lie milestones on the wayside of my life and as 

I loo bac in memory, there is hardly a stage of that distance but 

I see you present with advice, reproof, or praise.  Meanwhile, many 

things have changed, you and I among the rest but I hope that our 

sympathy, founded on the love of our art, and nourished by mutual 

assistance, shall survive these little revolutions, undiminished, 

and, with od's help, unite us to the end."



Thirdly, two scraps from letters from Stevenson to Henley, to show 

that the latter was not always a depreciator of R. . Stevenson's 

wor



"1. I'm glad to thin I owe you the review that pleased me best of 

all the reviews I ever had.... To live reading such reviews and die 

eating ortolans - sich is my aspiration.



"2. Dear lad, - If there was any more praise in what you wrote, I 

thin - (the editor who had pruned down Mr Henley's review of 

Stevenson's RIC TT) has done us both a service some of it 

stops my throat. . . . hether (considering our intimate relations) 

you would not do better to refrain from reviewing me, I will leave 

to yourself."



And, lastly, this extract from the very last of Stevenson's letters 

to Henley, published in the two volumes of TTRS



"It is impossible to let your new volume pass in silence.  I have 

not received the same thrill of poetry since . M.'s   ARTH 

volume, and  I A A and I do not now that even that was 

so intimate and deep. . . . I than you for the oy you have given 

me, and remain your old friend and present huge admirer, R. . S."





It is difficult to decide on which side in this literary friendship 

lies the true modesty and magnanimity  I had rather be the author 

of the last message of R. . Stevenson to . . Henley, than of the 

last words of . . Henley concerning R. . Stevenson.







CHATR  - MR CHRISTI MRRA'S IMRSSIS







MR CHRISTI MRRA, writing as "Merlin" in our handboo in the 

RR at the time, thus disposed of some of the points ust dealt 

with by us





"Here is libel on a large scale, and I have purposely refrained 

from approaching it until I could show my readers something of the 

spirit in which the whole attac is conceived.  'If he wanted a 

thing he went after it with an entire contempt for consequences.  

or these, indeed, the Shorter Catechist was ever prepared to 

answer so that whether he did well or ill, he was safe to come out 

unabashed and cheerful.'  ow if Mr Henley does not mean that for 

the very express picture of a rascal without a conscience he has 

been most strangely infelicitous in his choice of terms, and he is 

one of those who mae so strong a profession of duty towards mere 

vocables that we are obliged to tae him A ID D A TTR.  A 

man who goes after whatever he wants with an entire contempt of 

consequences is a scoundrel, and the man who emerges from such an 

enterprise unabashed and cheerful, whatever his conduct may have 

been, and ustifies himself on the principles of the Shorter 

Catechism, is a hypocrite to boot.  This is not the report we have 

of Robert ouis Stevenson from most of those who new him.  It is a 

most grave and dreadful accusation, and it is not minimised by Mr 

Henley's acnowledgment that Stevenson was a good fellow.  e all 

now the air of false candour which lends a disputant so much 

advantage in debate.  In ictor Hugo's tremendous indictment of 

apoleon le etit we remember the telling allowance for fine 

horsemanship.  It spreads an air of impartiality over the most 

mordant of Hugo's pages.  It is meant to do that.  An insignificant 

praise is meant to show how a whole iagara of blame is poured on 

the victim of invective in all sincerity, and even with a touch of 

reluctance.



"Mr Henley, despite his absurdities of ''Tis' and 'it were,' is a 

fairly competent literary craftsman, and he is quite gifted enough 

to mae a plain man's plain meaning an evident thing if he chose to 

do it.  ut if for the friend for whom 'first and last he did 

share' he can only show us the figure of one 'who was at bottom an 


excellent fellow,' and who had 'an entire contempt' for the 

consequences of his own acts, he presents a picture which can only 

purposely be obscured. . . .



"All I now of Robert ouis Stevenson I have learned from his 

boos, and from one unexpected impromptu letter which he wrote to 

me years ago in friendly recognition of my own wor.  I add the 

testimonies of friends who may have been of less actual service to 

him than Mr Henley, but who surely loved him better and more 

lastingly.  These do not represent him as the victim of an 

overweening personal vanity, nor as a person recless of the 

consequences of his own acts, nor as a ecsniff who consoled 

himself for moral failure out of the Shorter Catechism.  The boos 

and the friends amongst them show me an erratic yet lovable 

personality, a man of devotion and courage, a loyal, charming, and 

rather irresponsible person whose very slight faults were counter-

balanced many times over by very solid virtues....



"To put the thing flatly, it is not a heroism to cling to mere 

existence.  The basest of us can do that.  ut it is a heroism to 

maintain an equable and unbroen cheerfulness in the face of death.  

or my own part, I never bowed at the literary shrine Mr Henley and 

his friends were at so great pains to rear.  I am not disposed to 

thin more loftily than I ever thought of their idol.  ut the Man 

- the Man was made of enduring valour and childlie charm, and 

these will eep him alive when his detractors are dead and buried."





As to the Christian name, it is notorious that he was christened 

Robert ewis - the ewis being after his maternal grandfather - Dr 

ewis alfour.  Some attempt has been made to show that the ouis 

was adopted because so many cousins and relatives had also been so 

christened but the most liely explanation I have ever heard was 

that his father changed the name to ouis, that there might be no 

chance through it of any notion of association with a very 

prominent noisy person of the name of ewis, in dinburgh, towards 

whom Thomas Stevenson felt dislie, if not positive animosity.  

Anyhow, it is clear from the entries in the register of pupils at 

the dinburgh Academy, in the two years when Stevenson was there, 

that in early youth he was called Robert only for in the school 

list for 12 the name appears as Robert Stevenson, without the 

ewis, while in the 13 list it is given as ewis Robert 

Stevenson.  Clearly if in earlier years Stevenson was, in his 

family and elsewhere, called RRT, there could have then arisen 

no ris of confusion with any of his relatives who bore the name of 

ewis and all this goes to support the view which I have given 

above.  Anyhow he ceased to be called Robert at home, and ceased in 

13 to be Robert on the dinburgh Academy list, and became ewis 

Robert.  hether my view is right or not, he was thenceforward 

called ouis in his family, and the name uniformly spelt ouis.  

hat blame on Stevenson's part could be attached to this family 

determination it is hard to see - people are absolutely free to 

spell their names as they please, and the matter would not be worth 

a moment's attention, or the waste of one drop of in, had not Mr 

Henley chosen to be very nasty about the name, and in the A MA 

MAAI article persisted in printing it ewis as though that were 

worthy of him and of it.  That was not quite the unindest cut of 

all, but it was as unind as it was trumpery.  Mr Christie Murray 

neatly set off the trumpery spite of this in the following passage





"Stevenson, it appears, according to his friend's udgment, was 

'incessantly and passionately interested in Stevenson,' but most of 

us are incessantly and passionately interested in ourselves.  'He 

could not be in the same room with a mirror but he must invite its 

confidences every time he passed it.'  I remember that eorge Sala, 

who was certainly under no illusion as to his own personal aspect, 

made public confession of an identical foible.  Mr Henley may not 

have an equal affection for the looing-glass, but he is a very 

poor and unimaginative reader who does not see him gloating over 

the god-lie proportions of the shadow he sends sprawling over his 

own page.  I mae free to say that a more self-conscious person 

than Mr Henley does not live.  'The best and most interesting part 

of Stevenson's life will never get written - even by me,' says Mr 

Henley.



"There is one curious little mar of animus, or one equally curious 

affectation - I do not profess to now which, and it is most 

probably a compound of the two - in Mr Henley's guardedly spiteful 

essay which ass for notice.  The dead novelist signed his second 

name on his title-pages and his private correspondence 'ouis.'  Mr 

Henley spells it 'ewis.'  Is this intended to say that Stevenson 

too an ornamenting liberty with his own baptismal appellation  If 

so, why not say the thing and have done with it  r is it one of 

Mr Henley's wilful ridiculosities  It seems to stand for some sort 

of meaning, and to me, at least, it offers a arring hint of small 

spitefulness which might go for nothing if it were not so well 

borne out by the general tone of Mr Henley's article.  It is a 

small matter enough, od nows, but it is precisely because it is 

so very small that it irritates."







CHATR I - HR-IAIS







I truth, it must indeed be here repeated that Stevenson for the 

reason he himself gave about DAC RDI utterly fails in that 

healthy hatred of "fools and scoundrels" on which Carlyle somewhat 

incontinently dilated.  or does he, as we have seen, draw the line 

between hero and villain of the piece, as he ought to have done 

and, even for his own artistic purposes, has it too much all on one 

side, to express it simply.  Art demands relief from any one phase 

of human nature, more especially of that phase, and even from what 

is morbid or exceptional.  Admitting that such natures, say as 

Huish, the cocney, in the -TID on the one side, and rince 

tto on the other are possible, it is yet absolutely demanded that 

they should not stand A, but have their due complement and 

balance present in the piece also to deter and finally to tell on 

them in the action.  If "a nave or villain," as eorge liot aptly 

said, is but a fool with a circumbendibus, this not only wants to 

be shown, but to have that definite human counterpart and 

corrective and this not in any indirect and perfunctory way, but 

in a direct and effective sense.  It is here that Stevenson fails - 

fails absolutely in most of his wor, save the very latest - fails, 

as has been shown, in TH MASTR  AATRA, as it were almost 

of perverse and set purpose, in lac of what one might call ethical 

decision which causes him to waver or seem to waver and wobble in 

his udgment of his characters or in his sympathy with them or for 

them.  Thus he fails to give his readers the proper cue which was 

his duty both as man and artist to have given.  The highest art and 

the lowest are indeed here at one in demanding moral poise, if we 

may call it so, that however crudely in the low, and however 

artistically and refinedly in the high, vice should not only not be 

set forth as absolutely triumphing, nor virtue as being absolutely, 

outwardly, and inwardly defeated.  It is here the same in the 

melodrama of the transpontine theatre as in the tragedies of the 

ree dramatists and Shaespeare.  "The evening brings a' 'hame'" 

and the end ought to show something to satisfy the innate craving 

(for it is innate, than Heaven and low and high alie in moments 

of ATD IMRSSI, acnowledge it and bow to it) else there 

can scarce be true DMT and the sense of any moral rectitude 

or law remain as felt or acnowledged in human nature or in the 

niverse itself.



Stevenson's toleration and constant sermonising in the essays - his 

desire to mae us yield allowances all round is so far, it may be, 

there in place but it will not wor out in story or play, and 

declares the need for correction and limitation the moment that he 

essays artistic presentation - from the point of view of art he 

lacs at once artistic clearness and decision, and from the point 

of view of morality seems utterly loose and confusing.  His 

artistic quality here rests wholly in his style - mere style, and 

he is, alas a castaway as regards discernment and reading of human 

nature in its deepest demands and laws.  Herein lies the false 

strain that has spoiled much of his earlier wor, which renders 

really superficial and confusing and undramatic his professedly 

dramatic wor - which never will and never can commend the hearty 

suffrages of a mixed and various theatrical audience in violating 

the very first rule of the theatre, and of dramatic creation.



rom another point of view this is my answer to Mr inero in regard 

to the failure of Stevenson to command theatrical success.  He 

confuses and so far misdirects the sympathies in issues which 

strictly are at once moral and dramatic.



I am absolutely at one with Mr aildon, though I reach my results 

from somewhat different grounds from what he does, when he says 

this about A ASTI, and the reason of its failure - complete 

failure - on the stage





"I confess I should have lied immensely to have seen [ to see] 

this piece on the boards for only then could one be quite sure 

whether it could be made convincing to an audience and carry their 

sympathies in the way the author intended.  et the fact that A 

ASTI, in spite of being 'put on' by so eminent an actor-manager 

as Mr eerbohm Tree, was no great success on the stage, is a fair 

proof that the piece laced some of the essentials, good or bad, of 

dramatic success.  ow a drama, lie a picture or a musical 

composition, must have a certain unity of ey and tone.  ou can, 

indeed, mingle comedy with tragedy as an interlude or relief from 

the strain and stress of the serious interest of the piece.  ut 

you cannot reverse the process and mingle tragedy with comedy.  

nce touch the fine spun-sil of the pretty fire-balloon of comedy 

with the tragic dagger, and it falls to earth a shrivelled nothing.  

And the reason that no melodrama can be great art is ust that it 

is a compromise between tragedy and comedy, a mixture of tragedy 

with comedy and not comedy with tragedy.  So in drama, the middle 

course, proverbially the safest, is in reality the most dangerous.  

ow I maintain that in A ASTI we have an element of tragedy.  

The betrayal of a beautiful, pure and noble-minded woman is surely 

at once the basest act a man can be capable of, and a more tragic 

event than death itself to the woman.  Richardson, in CARISSA 

HAR, is well aware of this, and is perfectly right in maing 

his DMT tragic.  Stevenson, on the other hand, patches up 

the matter into a rather tame comedy.  It is even much tamer than 

it would have been in the case of ovelace and Clarissa Harlowe 

for ovelace is a strong character, a man who could have been put 

through some crucial atonement, and come out purged and ennobled.  

ut eau Austin we feel is but a frip.  He endures a few minutes of 

sharp humiliation, it is true, but to the spectator this cannot but 

seem a very insufficient expiation, not only of the wrong he had 

done one woman, but of the indefinite number of wrongs he had done 

others.  He is at once the villain and the hero of the piece, and 

in the narrow limits of a brief comedy this transformation cannot 

be convincingly effected.  rongly or rightly, a theatrical 

audience, lie the spectators of a trial, demand a definite verdict 

and sentence, and no play can satisfy which does not reasonably 

meet this demand.  And this arises not from any merely Christian 

prudery or uritanism, for it is as true for ree tragedy and 

other high forms of dramatic art."





The transformation of villain into hero, if possible at all, could 

only be convincingly effected in a piece of wide scope, where there 

was room for woring out the effect of some great shoc, upheaval 

of the nature, change due to deep and unprecedented experiences - 

religious conversion, witnessing of sudden death, providential 

rescue from great peril of death, or circumstance of that ind but 

to be effective and convincing it needs to be mared and  

STIID in some such way and no cleverness in the writer will 

absolve him from deference to this great law in serious wor for 

presentation on the stage if mere farces or little comedies may 

seem sometimes to contravene it, yet this - even this - is only in 

appearance.



True, it is not the dramatists part  HIMS to condemn, or to 

approve, or praise  he has to present, and to present various 

characters faithfully in their relation to each other, and their 

effect upon each other.  ut the moral element cannot be expunged 

or set lightly aside because it is closely involved in the very 

woring out and presentation of these relations, and the effect 

upon each other.  Character is vital.  And character, if it tells 

in life, in influence and affection, must be made to tell directly 

also in the drama.  There is no escape from this - none the 

dramatist is lopsided if he tries to ignore it he is a monster if 

he is wholly blind to it - lie the poet in I MMRIAM, "ithout a 

conscience or an aim."  Mr Henley, in his notorious, all too 

confessional, and yet rather affected article on Stevenson in the 

A MA MAAI, has a remar which I confess astonished me - a 

remar I could never forget as coming from him.  He said that he 

"had lived a very full and varied life, and had no interest in 

remars about morals."  "Remars about morals" are, nevertheless, 

in essence, the pith of all the boos to which he referred, as 

those to which he turned in preference to the DIRH DITI of 

R. . Stevenson's wors.  The moral element is implicit in the 

drama, and it is implicit there because it is implicit in life 

itself, or so the great common-sense conceives it and demands it.  

hat we might call the asides proper of the drama, are "remars 

about morals," nothing else - the chorus in the ree tragedy 

gathered up "remars about morals" as near as might be to the 

"remars about morals" in the streets of that day, only shaped to a 

certain artistic consistency.  Shaespeare is rich in "remars 

about morals," often coming near, indeed, to personal utterance, 

and this not only when olonius addresses his son before his going 

forth on his travels.  Mr Henley here only too plainly confessed, 

indeed, to lac of that conviction and insight which, had he but 

possessed them, might have done a little to relieve A ASTI and 

the other plays in which he collaborated with R. . Stevenson, from 

their besetting and fatal weaness.  The two youths, alas thought 

they could be grandly original by despising, or worse, contemning 

"remars about morals" in the loftier as in the lower sense.  To 

"live a full and varied life," if the experience derived from it is 

to have expression in the drama, is only to have the richer 

resource in "remars about morals."  If this is perverted under any 

self-conscious notion of doing something spic-and-span new in the 

way of character and plot, alien to all the old conceptions, then 

we now our writers set themselves boldly at loggerheads with 

certain old-fashioned and yet older new-fashioned laws, which 

forbid the violation of certain common demands of the ordinary 

nature and common-sense and for the lac of this, as said already, 

no cleverness, no resource, no style or graft, will any way mae 

up.  So long as this is tried, with whatever concentration of mind 

and purpose, failure is yet inevitable, and the more inevitable the 

more concentration and less of humorous by-play, because genius 

itself, if it despises the general moral sentiment and instinct for 

moral proportion - an ethnic reward and punishment, so to say - is 

all astray, woring outside the line and this, if Mr inero will 

indly excuse me, is the secret of the failure of these plays, and 

not want of concentration, etc., in the sense he meant, or as he 

has put it.



Stevenson rather affected what he called "tail-foremost morality," 

a ind of inversion in the field of morals, as De uincey mixed it 

up with tail-foremost humour in MRDR AS A I ART, etc., etc., 

but for all such perversions as these the stage is a grand test and 

corrector, and such perversions, and not "remars about morals," 

are most strictly prohibited there.  erverted subtleties of the 

sort Stevenson in earlier times especially much affected are not 

only amiss but ruinous on the stage and what genius itself would 

maybe sanction, common-sense must reect and rigidly cut away.  

inal success and triumph come largely by THIS ind of condensation 

and concentration, and the stern and severe lopping off of the 

indulgence of the TISTICA genius, which is human discipline, 

and the best exponent of the doctrine of unity also.  This is the 

straight and the narrow way along which genius, if it wal but 

faithfully, sows as it goes in the dramatic pathway all the flowers 

of human passion, hope, love, terror, and triumph.



I find it advisable, if not needful, here to reinforce my own 

impressions, at some points, by another quotation from Mr aildon, 

if he will allow me, in which Stevenson's dependence in certain 

respects on the dream-faculty is emphasised, and to it is traced a 

certain tendency to a moral callousness or indifference which is 

one of the things in which the waing Stevenson transparently 

suffered now and then invasions from the dream-Stevenson - the 

result, a ind of spot, as we may call it, on the eye of the moral 

sense it is a small spot but we now how a very small obect held 

close before the eye will wholly shut out the most lovely natural 

prospects, interposing distressful phantasmagoria, due to the 

strained and, for the time, morbid condition of the organ itself.  

So, it must be confessed, it is to a great extent here.



ut listen to Mr aildon





"In A CHATR  DRAMS, Stevenson confesses his indebtedness to 

this still mysterious agency.  rom a child he had been a great and 

vivid dreamer, his dreams often taing such frightful shape that he 

used to awae 'clinging in terror to the bedpost.'  ater in life 

his dreams continued to be frequent and vivid, but less terrifying 

in character and more continuous and systematic.  'The rownies,' 

as he picturesquely names that 'sub-conscious imagination,' as the 

scientist would call it, that wors with such surprising freedom 

and ingenuity in our dreams, became, as it were, CARATRS in 

his wor of authorship.  He declares that they invented plots and 

even elaborated whole novels, and that, not in a single night or 

single dream, but continuously, and from one night to another, lie 

a story in serial parts.  ong before this essay was written or 

published, I had been struc by this phantasmal dream-lie quality 

in some of Stevenson's wors, which I was puled to account for, 

until I read this extraordinary explanation, for explanation it 

undoubtedly affords.  Anything imagined in a dream would have a 

tendency, when retold, to retain something of its dream-lie 

character, and I have on doubt one could trace in many instances 

and distinguish the dreaming and the waing Stevenson, though in 

others they may be blended beyond recognition.  The trouble with 

the rownies or the dream-Stevenson AS HIS R THIR AT  MRA 

SS, so that they sometimes presented the waing author with 

plots which he could not mae use of.  f this Stevenson gives an 

instance in which a complete story of mared ingenuity is vetoed 

through the moral impossibility of its presentment by a writer so 

scrupulous (and in some directions he is extremely scrupulous) as 

Stevenson was.  ut Stevenson admits that his most famous story, 

TH STRA CAS  DR  AD MR HD, was not only suggested 

by a dream, but that some of the most important and most criticised 

points, such as the matter of the powder, were taen direct from 

the dream.  It had been extremely instructive and interesting had 

he gone more into detail and mentioned some of the other stories 

into which the dream-element entered largely and pointed out its 

influence, and would have given us a better clue than we have or 

now ever can have.



"ven in TH SICID C and the RAAH'S DIAMD, I seem to feel 

strongly the presence of the dream-Stevenson. . . . AT CRTAI 

ITS  S CSCIS  A CRTAI MRA CASSS, SCH AS 

MARS TH DRAM STAT, AS I TH MRDR  C RADI'S 

RTHR, TH HRRR  HICH R SMS T CM  HM T S.  

ut let no one suppose these stories are lacing in vividness and 

in strangely realistic detail for this is of the very nature of 

dreaming at its height. . . . hile the DRAMATIS RSA play 

their parts with the utmost spirit while the story proceeds, they 

do not, as the past creations do, seem to survive this first 

contact and live in our minds.  This is particularly true of the 

women.  They are well drawn, and play the assigned parts well 

enough, but they do not, as a rule, mae a place for themselves 

either in our hearts or memories.  If there is an exception it is 

lvira, in RIDC AD TH ITAR but we remember her chiefly 

by the one picture of her falling asleep, after the misadventures 

of the night, at the supper-table, with her head on her husband's 

shoulder, and her hand loced in his with instinctive, almost 

unconscious tenderness."







CHATR II - MR . MR, MR MARRITT ATS AD THRS







RM our point of view it will therefore be seen that we could not 

have read Mr eorge Moore's wonderfully uncritical and misdirected 

diatribe against Stevenson in TH DAI CHRIC of 24th April 

19, without amusement, if not without laughter - indeed, we 

confess we may here quote Shaespeare's words, we "laughed so 

consumedly" that, unless for Mr Moore's high position and his 

assured self-confidence, we should not trust ourselves to refer to 

it, not to spea of writing about it.  It was a review of TH 

SCRT RS by . . eats, but it passed after one single touch to 

belittling abuse of Stevenson - an abuse that was ustified the 

more, in Mr Moore's idea, because Stevenson was dead.  Had he been 

alive he might have had something to say to it, in the way, at 

least, of fable and moral.  And when towards the close Mr Moore 

again quotes from Mr eats, it is still "harping on my daughter" to 

undo Stevenson, as though a rat was behind the arras, as in HAMT.  

"Stevenson," says he, "is the leader of these countless writers who 

perceive nothing but the visible world," and these are antagonistic 

to the great literature, of which Mr eats's SCRT RS is a 

survival or a renaissance, a literature whose watchword should be 

Mr eats's significant phrase, "hen one loos into the darness 

there is always something there."  o doubt Mr eats's product all 

along the line rans with the great literature - unlie Homer, 

according to Mr Moore, he never nods, though in the light of great 

literature, poor Stevenson is always at his noddings, and more than 

that, in the words of eland's Hans reitmann, he has "nodings on."  

He is poor, naed, miserable - a mere pretender - and has no share 

in the maings of great literature.  Mr Moore has stripped him to 

the sin, and leaves him to the mercy of rain and storm, lie ear, 

though ear had a solid ground to go on in self-aid, which 

Stevenson had not he had daughters, and one of them was Cordelia, 

after all.  This comes of painting all boldly in blac and white  

Mr eats is white, R. . Stevenson is blac, and I am sure neither 

one nor other, because simply of their self-devotion to their art, 

could have subscribed heartily to Mr Moore's blac art and white 

art theory.  Mr eats is hardly the truest modern Celtic artist I 

tae him for, if he can fully subscribe to all this.



Mr Marriott atson has a little unadvisedly, in my view, too lie 

ambition, fallen on 'tother side, and celebrated Stevenson as the 

master of the horrifying. (11)  He even finds the -TID, and 

Huish, the cocney, in it richly illustrative and grand.  "There 

never was a more magnificent cad in literature, and never a more 

foul-hearted little ruffian.  His picture glitters () with life, 

and when he curls up on the island beach with the bullet in his 

body, amid the flames of the vitriol he had intended for another, 

the reader's shudder conveys something also, even () of regret."



And well it may  Individual taste and opinion are but individual 

taste and opinion, but the -TID and the cocney I should be 

inclined to cite as a specimen of Stevenson's all too facile mae-

believe, in which there is too definite a machinery set agoing for 

horrors for the horrors to be quite genuine.  The process is often 

too forced with Stevenson, and the incidents too much of the 

manufactured order, for the triumph of that simplicity which is of 

inspiration and unassailable.  Here Stevenson, alas all too often, 

AC Mr Marriott atson, treads on the sirts of . A. oe, and 

that in his least composed and elevated artistic moments.  And 

though, it is true, that "genius will not follow rules laid down by 

desultory critics," yet when it is averred that "this piece of wor 

fulfils Aristotle's definition of true tragedy, in accomplishing 

upon the reader a certain purification of the emotions by means of 

terror and pity," expectations will be raised in many of the new 

generation, doomed in the cases of the more sensitive and 

discerning, at all events, not to be gratified.  There is a 

distinction, very bold and very essential, between melodrama, 

however carefully wored and staged, and that tragedy to which 

Aristotle was there referring.  Stevenson's "horrifying," to my 

mind, too often touches the trying borders of melodrama, and 

nowhere more so than in the very forced and unequal -TID, 

which, with its rather doubtful moral and forced incident when it 

is good, seems merely to borrow from what had gone before, if not a 

very little even from some of what came after.  o service is done 

to an author lie Stevenson by fatefully praising him for precisely 

the wrong thing.





"Romance attracted Stevenson, at least during the earlier part of 

his life, as a lodestone attracts the magnet.  To romance he 

brought the highest gifts, and he has left us not only essays of 

delicate humour" (should this not be "essays  " R 

"characterised by") "and sensitive imagination, but stories also 

which thrill with the realities of life, which are faithful 

pictures of the times and tempers he dealt with, and which, I 

firmly believe, will live so" (should it not be "as") "long as our 

noble nglish language."





Mr Marriott atson sees very clearly in some things but 

occasionally he misses the point.  The problem is here raised how 

two honest, far-seeing critics could see so very differently on so 

simple a subect.



Mr aildon says about the -TID





"I can compare his next boo, the -TID (in collaboration with 

sbourne) to little better than a mud-bath, for we find ourselves, 

as it were, unrelieved by dredging among the scum and dregs of 

humanity, the 'white trash' of the acific.  Here we have 

Stevenson's masterly but utterly revolting incarnation of the 

lowest, vilest, vulgarest villainy in the cocney, Huish.  

Stevenson's other villains shoc us by their cruel and wiced 

conduct but there is a ind of fallen satanic glory about them, 

some shining threads of possible virtue.  They might have been 

good, even great in goodness, but for the malady of not wanting.  

ut Huish is a creature hatched in slime, his soul has no true 

humanity  it is squat and toad-lie, and can only spit venom. . . 

. He himself felt a sort of revulsive after-sicness for the story, 

and calls it in one passage of his AIIMA TTRS 'the ever-to-be-

execrated -TID' (pp.  1 and 14). . . . He repented of it 

lie a debauch, and, as with some men after a debauch, felt cleared 

and strengthened instead of wreced.  So, after what in one sense 

was his lowest plunge, Stevenson rose to the greatest height.  That 

is the tribute to his virtue and strength indeed, but it does not 

change the character of the -TID as 'the ever-to-be-

execrated.'"





Mr aildon truly says (p. 49)





"The curious point is that Stevenson's own great fault, that 

tendency to what has been called the 'Twopence-coloured' style, is 

always at its worst in boos over which he collaborated."



"erax," in one of his "ccasional apers" in the DAI S on 

"The Average Reader" has this passage



"e should not obect to a writer who could repeat arrie in A 

ID I THRMS, nor to one who would paint a scene as ouis 

Stevenson paints Attwater alone on his South Sea island, the 

approach of the pirates to the harbour, and their subsequent 

reception and fate.  All these are surely specimens of brilliant 

writing, and they are brilliant because, in the first place, they 

give truth.  The events described must, in the supposed 

circumstances, and with the given characters, have happened in the 

way stated.  nly in none of the specimens have we a mere 

photograph of the outside of what too place.  e have great 

pictures by genius of the - to the prosaic eye - invisible 

realities, as well as of the outward form of the actions.  e 

behold and are made to feel the solemnity, the wildness, the 

pathos, the earnestness, the agony, the pity, the moral squalor, 

the grotesque fun, the delicate and minute beauty, the natural 

loveliness and loneliness, the quiet desperate bravery, or whatever 

else any of these wonderful pictures disclose to our view.  Had we 

been looers-on, we, the average readers, could not have seen these 

qualities for ourselves.  ut they are there, and genius enables us 

to see them.  enius maes truth shine.



"Is it not, therefore, probable that the brilliancy which we 

average readers do not want, and only laugh at when we get it, is 

something altogether different  I thin I now what it is.  It is 

an attempt to describe with words without thoughts, an effort to 

mae readers see something the writer has never seen himself in his 

mind's eye.  He has no revelation, no vision, nothing to disclose, 

and to produce an impression uses words, words, words, maes daub, 

daub, daub, without any definite purpose, and certainly without any 

real, or artistic, or definite effect.  To describe, one must first 

of all see, and if we see anything the description of it will, as 

far as it is in us, come as effortless and natural as the leaves on 

trees, or as 'the tender greening of April meadows.'  I, therefore, 

more than suspect that the brilliancy which the average reader 

laughs at is not brilliancy.  A pot of flaming red paint thrown at 

a canvas does not mae a picture."





ow there is vision for outward picture or separate incident, which 

may exist quite apart from what may be called moral, spiritual, or 

even loftily imaginative conception, at once commanding unity and 

commanding it.  There can be no doubt of Stevenson's power in the 

former line - the earliest as the latest of his wors are witnesses 

to it.  TH MASTR  AATRA abounds in picture and incident 

and dramatic situations and touches but it lacs true unity, and 

the reason simply is given by Stevenson himself - that the "ending 

shames, perhaps degrades, the beginning," as it is in the -TID, 

with the cocney Huish, "execrable."  "e have great pictures by 

genius of the - to the prosaic eye - invisible realities, as well 

as the outward form of the action."  True, but the "invisible 

realities" form that from which true unity is derived, else their 

partial presence but maes the whole the more incomplete and lop-

sided, if not indeed, top-heavy, from light weight beneath and it 

is in the unity derived from this higher pervading, yet not too 

assertive "invisible reality," that Stevenson most often fails, and 

is, in his own words, "execrable" the ending shaming, if not 

degrading, the beginning - "and without the true sense of 

pleasurableness and therefore really imperfect I SSC."  Ah, 

it is to be feared that Stevenson, viewing it in retrospect, was a 

far truer critic of his own wor, than many or most of his all too 

effusive and admiring critics - from ord Rosebery to Mr Marriott 

atson.



Amid the too extreme deliverances of detractors and especially of 

erewhile friends, become detractors or panegyrists, who disturb 

udgment by overeal, which is often but half-blindness, it is 

pleasant to come on one who bears the balances in his hand, and 

will report faithfully as he has seen and felt, neither more nor 

less than what he holds is true.  Mr Andrew ang wrote an article 

in the MRI ST of 1th December 191, under the title 

"iterary uarrels," in which, as I thin, he fulfilled his part in 

midst of the tal about Mr Henley's regrettable attac on 

Stevenson.





"ithout defending the character of a friend whom even now I almost 

daily miss, as that character was displayed in circumstances 

unnown to me, I thin that I ought to spea of him as I found him.  

erhaps our sympathy was mainly intellectual.  Constantly do those 

who new him desire to turn to him, to communicate with him, to 

share with him the pleasure of some idea, some little discovery 

about men or things in which he would have taen pleasure, 

increasing our own by the gaiety of his enoyment, the brilliance 

of his appreciation.  e may say, as Scott said at the grave of 

ohn allantyne, that he has taen with him half the sunlight out 

of our lives.  That he was sympathetic and interested in the wor 

of others (which I understand has been denied) I have reason to 

now.  His wor and mine lay far apart  mine, I thin, we never 

discussed, I did not expect it to interest him.  ut in a 

fragmentary manuscript of his after his death I found the unlooed 

for and touching evidence of his indness.  Again, he once wrote to 

me from Samoa about the wor of a friend of mine whom he had never 

met.  His remars were ideally udicious, a model of serviceable 

criticism.  I found him chivalrous as an honest boy brave, with an 

indomitable gaiety of courage on the point of honour, a Sydney or 

a ayard (so he seemed to me) that he was open-handed I have 

reason to believe he too life 'with a frolic welcome.'  That he 

was self-conscious, and saw himself as it were, from without that 

he was fond of attitude (lie his own brave admirals) he himself 

new well, and I doubt not that he would laugh at himself and his 

habit of 'playing at' things after the fashion of childhood.  

enius is the survival into maturity of the inspiration of 

childhood, and Stevenson is not the only genius who has retained 

from childhood something more than its inspiration.  ther examples 

readily occur to the memory - in one way yron, in another 

Tennyson.  one of us is perfect  I do not want to erect an 

immaculate clay-cold image of a man, in marble or in sugar-candy.  

ut I will say that I do not remember ever to have heard Mr 

Stevenson utter a word against any mortal, friend or foe.  ven in 

a case where he had, or believed himself to have, received some 

wrong, his comment was merely humorous.  specially when very 

young, his dislie of respectability and of the RIS (a 

literary tradition) led him to show a ind of contempt for virtues 

which, though certainly respectable, are no less certainly 

virtuous.  He was then more or less seduced by the ohemian legend, 

but he was intolerant of the fudge about the rights and privileges 

of genius.  A man's first business, he thought, was 'eep his end 

up' by his wor.  If, what he reconed his inspired wor would not 

serve, then by something else.  f many virtues he was an ensample 

and an inspiring force.  ne foible I admit  the tendency to 

inopportune benevolence.  Mr raham alfour says that if he fell 

into ill terms with a man he would try to do him good by stealth.  

Though he had seen much of the world and of men, this practice 

showed an invincible ignorance of manind.  It is improbable, on 

the doctrine of chances, that he was always in the wrong and it is 

probable, as he was human, that he always thought himself in the 

right.  ut as the other party to the misunderstanding, being also 

human, would necessarily thin himself in the right, such secret 

benefits would be, as Sophocles says, 'the gifts of foeman and 

unprofitable.'  The secret would lea out, the benefits would be 

reected, the misunderstanding would be embittered.  This reminds 

me of an anecdote which is not given in Mr raham alfour's 

biography.  As a little delicate, lonely boy in dinburgh, Mr 

Stevenson read a boo called MIISTRI CHIDR.  I have a faint 

recollection of this wor concerning a small ord and ady 

ountiful.  Children, we now, lie to 'play at' the events and 

characters they have read about, and the boy wanted to play at 

being a ministering child.  He 'scanned his whole horion' for 

somebody to play with, and thought he had found his playmate.  rom 

the window he observed street boys (in Scots 'eelies') enoying 

themselves.  ut one child was out of the sports, a little lame 

fellow, the son of a baer.  Here was a chance  After some 

misgivings ouis hardened his heart, put on his cap, waled out - a 

refined little figure - approached the obect of his sympathy, and 

said, 'ill you let me play with you'  'o to hell' said the 

democratic offspring of the baer.  This lesson against doing good 

by stealth to persons of unnown or hostile disposition was, it 

seems, thrown away.  Such endeavours are apt to be misconstrued."







CHATR III - CTD CMIATIS







TH complete artist should not be mystical-moralist any more than 

the man who "perceives only the visible world" - he should not 

engage himself with problems in the direct sense any more than he 

should blind himself to their effect upon others, whom he should 

study, and under certain conditions represent, though he should not 

commit himself to any form of ealot faith, yet should he not be, 

as ord Tennyson puts it in the alace of Art





"As od holding no form of creed,

ut contemplating all,"





because his power lies in the broadness of his humanity touched to 

fine issues whenever there is the seal at once of truth, reality, 

and passion, and the tragedy bred of their contact and conflict.



All these things are to him real and clamant in the measure that 

they aid appeal to heart and emotion - in the measure that they 

may, in his hands, be made to tell for sympathy and general effect.  

He creates an atmosphere in which each and all may be seen the more 

effectively, but never seen alone or separate, but only in strict 

relation to each other that they may heighten the sense of some 

supreme controlling power in the destinies of men, which with the 

ancients was figured as ate, and for which the moderns have hardly 

yet found an enduring and exhaustive name.  Character revealed in 

reference to that, is the ideal and the aim of all high creative 

art.  Stevenson's narrowness, allied to a quaint and occasionally 

ust a wee pedantic finiciness, as we may call it - an over-

elaborate, almost tricy play with mere words and phrases, was in 

so far alien to the very highest - he was too often lie a man 

magnetised and moving at the dictates of some outside influence 

rather than according to his own freewill and as he would.



Action in creative literary art is a SI A  eeping all the 

characters and parts in unison, that a true DMT, determined 

by their own tendencies and temperaments, may appear dialogue and 

all asides, if we may call them so, being supererogatory and wea 

really unless they aid this and are constantly contributory to it.  

gotistical predeterminations, however artfully intruded, are, 

alien to the full result, the unity which is finally craved  

Stevenson fails, when he does fail, distinctly from excess of 

egotistic regards he is, as Henley has said, in the rench sense, 

too RS, and cannot escape from it.  And though these 

personal regards are exceedingly interesting and indeed fascinating 

from the point of view of autobiographical study, they are, and 

cannot but be, a drawbac on fiction or the disinterested 

revelation of life and reality.  Instead, therefore, of "the 

visible world," as the only thing seen, Stevenson's defect is, that 

between it and him lies a cloud strictly self-proected, lie 

breath on a mirror, which dims the lines of reality and confuses 

the character mars, in fact melting them into each other and in 

his sympathetic regards, causing them all to become too much alie.  

Scott had more of the power of healthy self-withdrawal, creating 

more of a free atmosphere, in which his characters could freely 

move - though in this, it must be confessed, he failed far more 

with women than with men.  The very defects poor Carlyle found in 

Scott, and for which he dealt so severely with him, as sounding no 

depth, are really the basis of his strength, precisely as the 

absence of them were the defects of oethe, who invariably ran his 

characters finally into the mere moods of his own mind and the 

mould of his errant philosophy, so that they became merely erratic 

symbols without hold in the common sympathy.  hether 

ARADSCHAT, IHM MISTR, or AST, it is still the same 

- the company before all is done are translated into misty shapes 

that he actually needs to label for our identification and for his 

own.  ven Mr . H. ewes saw this and could not help declaring his 

own lac of interest in the latter parts of oethe's greatest 

efforts.  Stevenson, too, tends to run his characters into symbols 

- his moralist-fabulist determinations are too much for him - he 

would translate them into a ind of chessmen, moved or moving on a 

board.  The essence of romance strictly is, that as the characters 

will not submit themselves to the chec of reality, the romancer 

may consciously, if it suits him, touch them at any point with the 

magic wand of symbol, and if he finds a consistency in mere 

fanciful invention it is enough.  Tiec's HATASS and eorge 

MacDonald's HATASTS are ready instances illustrative of this.  

ut it is very different with the story of real life, where there 

is a definite chec in the common-sense and nowledge of the 

reader, and where the highest victory always lies in drawing from 

the reader the admission - "that is life - life exactly as I have 

seen and nown it.  Though I could never have put it so, still it 

only realises my own conception and observation.  That is something 

lovingly remembered and re-presented, and this master maes me 

lovingly remember too, though 'twas his to represent and reproduce 

with such vigor, vividness and truth that he carried me with him, 

exactly as though I had been looing on real men and women playing 

their part or their game in the great world."



Mr angwill, in his own style, wrote





"He sees to combine the novel of character with the novel of 

adventure to develop character through romantic action, and to 

bring out your hero at the end of the episode, not the fixed 

character he was at the beginning, as is the way of adventure 

boos, but a modified creature. . . . It is his essays and his 

personality, rather than his novels, that will count with 

posterity.  n the whole, a great provincial writer.  hether he 

has that inherent grip which maes a man's provinciality the very 

source of his strength . . . only the centuries can show.





The romanticist to the end pursued Stevenson - he could not, wholly 

or at once, shae off the bonds in which he had bound himself to 

his first love, and it was the romanticist crossed by the casuist, 

and the mystic - Dr eyll and Mr Hyde, Marheim and ill of the 

Mill, insisted on his acnowledging them in his wor up to the end.  

TH MDIID CRATR at the end of Mr angwill was modified too 

directly by the egotistic element as well as through the romantic 

action, and this point missed the great defect was missed, and Mr 

angwill spoe only in generals.



M. Schwob, after having related how unreal a real sheep's heart 

looed when introduced on the end of iovanni's dagger in a rench 

performance of ohn ord's AAA AD IAI, and how at the 

next performance the audience was duly thrilled when Annabella's 

bleeding heart, made of a bit of red flannel, was borne upon the 

stage, goes on to say significantly





"Il me semble que les personnages de Stevenson ont ustement cette 

espece de realisme irreal.  a large figure luisante de ong ohn, 

la couleur bleme du crane de Thevenin ensete s'attachent a la 

memoire de nos yeux en vertue de leur irrealite meme.  Ce sont des 

fantomes de la verite, hallucinants comme de vrais fantomes.  ote 

en passant que les traits de ohn Silver hallucinent im Hawins, 

et que rancois illon est hante par l'aspect de Thevenin ensete."





erhaps the most notable fact arising here, and one that well 

deserves celebration, is this, that Stevenson's development towards 

a broader and more natural creation was coincident with a definite 

return on the religious views which had so powerfully prevailed 

with his father - a circumstance which it is to be feared did not, 

any more than some other changes in him, at all commend itself to 

Mr Henley, though he had deliberately dubbed him even in the times 

of nursing nigh to the ld risto ort in dinburgh - something of 

"Shorter Catechist." Anyway Miss Simpson deliberately wrote





"Mr Henley taes exception to Stevenson's later phase in life - 

what he calls his 'Shorter Catechism phase.'  It should be 

remembered that Mr Henley is not a Scotsman, and in some things has 

little sympathy with Scotch characteristics.  Stevenson, in his 

Samoan days, hared bac to the teaching of his youth the tenets 

of the Shorter Catechism, which his mother and nurse had dinned 

into his head, were not forgotten.  Mr Henley new him best, as 

Stevenson says in the preface to IRIIS RIS dedicated to 

Henley, 'when he lived his life at twenty-five.'  In these days he 

had [in some degree] forgotten about the Shorter Catechism, but the 

'solemn pause' between Saturday and Monday came bac in full force 

to R. . Stevenson in Samoa."





ow to me that is a most suggestive and significant fact.  It will 

be the business of future critics to show in how far such falling 

bac would of necessity modify what Mr aildon has set down as his 

corner-stone of morality, and how far it was bound to modify the 

atmosphere - the purely egotistic, hedonistic, and artistic 

atmosphere, in which, in his earlier life as a novelist, at all 

events, he had been, on the whole, for long whiles content to wor.







CHATR I -   AADS







HAT is very remarable in Stevenson is that a man who was so much 

the dreamer of dreams - the mystic moralist, the constant 

questioner and speculator on human destiny and human perversity, 

and the riddles that arise on the search for the threads of motive 

and incentives to human action - moreover, a man, who constantly 

suffered from one of the most trying and weaening forms of ill-

health - should have been so full-blooded, as it were, so een for 

contact with all forms of human life and character, what is called 

the rougher and coarser being by no means excluded.  ot only this  

he was himself a rover - seeing daily adventure and contact with 

men and women of alien habit and taste and liing.  His patience is 

supported by his humour.  He was a bit of a vagabond in the good 

sense of the word, and always going round in search of "honest 

men," lie Diogenes, and with no tub to retire into or the desire 

for it.  He thus on this side touches the Chaucers and their 

indred, as well as the Spensers and Dantes and their often 

illusive CRRS.  His voyage as a steerage passenger across the 

Atlantic is only one out of a whole chapter of such episodes, and 

is more significant and characteristic even than the TRAS ITH A 

D I TH CS or the IAD A.  These might be raned 

with the "Sentimental ourneys" that have sometimes been the 

fashion - that was truly of a prosaic and risy order.  The appeal 

thus made to an element deep in the nglish nature will do much to 

eep his memory green in the hearts that could not rise to 

appreciation of his style and literary gifts at all.  He loves the 

roadways and the by-ways, and those to be met with there - lie him 

in this, though unlie him in most else.  The love of the roadsides 

and the greenwood - and the queer miscellany of life there unfolded 

and ever changing - a ind of gipsy-lie longing for the tent and 

familiar contact with nature and rude human-nature in the open 

dates from beyond Chaucer, and remains and will have gratification 

- the longing for novelty and all the accidents, as it were, of 

pilgrimage and rude social travel.  ou see it bubble up, lie a 

true and new nature-spring, through all the surface coatings of 

culture and artificiality, in Stevenson.  He anew, without 

pretence, enlivens it - maes it first a part of himself, and then 

a part of literature once more.  isten to him, as he sincerely 

sings this passion for the pilgrimage - or the modern phase of it - 

innocent vagabond roving





"ive to me the life I love,

et the lave go by me

ive the olly heaven above,

And the by-way nigh me

ed in the bush, with stars to see

read I dip in the river -

Here's the life for a man lie me,

Here's the life for ever....



"et the blow fall soon or late

et what will be o'er me

ive the face of earth around

And the road before me.

Health I as not, hope nor love,

or a friend to now me

All I as the heaven above,

And the road below me."





True this is put in the mouth of another, but Stevenson could not 

have so voiced it, had he not been the born rover that he was, with 

longing for the roadside, the high hills, and forests and newcomers 

and varied miscellaneous company.  Here he does more directly spea 

in his own person and quite to the same effect





"I will mae you brooches and toys for your delight

f bird song at morning, and star shine at night,

I will mae a palace fit for you and me,

f green days in forests and blue days at sea.



"I will mae my itchen, and you shall eep your room,

here white flows the river, and bright blows the broom,

And you shall wash your linen and eep your body white,

In rainfall at morning and dew-fall at night.



"And this shall be for music when no one else is near,

The fine song for singing, the rare song to hear

That only I remember, that only you admire,

f the broad road that stretches, and the roadside fire."





Here Stevenson, though original in his vein and way, but follows a 

great and gracious company in which ielding and Sterne and so many 

others stand as pleasant proctors.  Scott and Dicens have each in 

their way essayed it, and made much of it beyond what mere 

sentiment would have reached.  ICIC itself - and we must always 

regard Dicens as having himself gone already over every bit of 

road, described every noo and corner, and tried every resource - 

is a vagrant fellow, in a group of erratic and most quaint 

wanderers or pilgrims.  This is but a return phase of it incent 

Crummles and Mrs Crummles and the "Infant henomenon," yet another.  

The whole interest lies in the roadways, and the little inns, and 

the odd and unexpected RCTRS with oddly-assorted fellows there 

experienced  glimpses of grim or grimy, or forbidding, or happy, 

smiling smiring vagrants, and out-at-elbows fellow-passengers and 

guests, with ests and quips and crans, and hany-pany even.  n 

high roads and in inns, and alehouses, with travelling players, 

rogues and tramps, Dicens was quite at home and what is yet more, 

he made us all quite at home with them  and he did it as Chaucer 

did it by thorough good spirits and "hail-fellow-well-met."  And, 

with all his faults, he has this merit as well as some others, that 

he went willingly on pilgrimage always, and too others, promoting 

always love of comrades, fun, and humorous by-play.  The latest 

great romancer, too, too his side  lie Dicens, he was here full 

brother of Dan Chaucer, and followed him.  How characteristic it is 

when he tells Mr Trigg that he preferred Samoa to Honolulu because 

it was more savage, and therefore yielded more .







CHATR  - RD RSR'S CAS







IMMDIAT on reading ord Rosebery's address as Chairman of the 

meeting in dinburgh to promote the erection of a monument to R. . 

Stevenson, I wrote to him politely asing him whether, since he 

quoted a passage from a somewhat early essay by Stevenson naming 

the authors who had chiefly influenced him in point of style, his 

ordship should not, merely in ustice and for the sae of balance, 

have referred to Thoreau.  I also remared that Stevenson's later 

style sometimes showed too much self-conscious conflict of his 

various models in his mind while he was in the act of writing, and 

that this now and then imparted too much an air of artifice to his 

later compositions, and that those who new most would be most 

troubled by it.  f that letter, I much regret now that I did not 

eep any copy but I thin I did incidentally refer to the 

friendship with which Stevenson had for so many years honoured me.  

This is a copy of the letter received in reply





"3 R SAR, .,

1th DCMR 19.



"DAR SIR, - I am much obliged for your letter, and can only state 

that the name of Thoreau was not mentioned by Stevenson himself, 

and therefore I could not cite it in my quotation.



"ith regard to the style of Stevenson's later wors, I am inclined 

to agree with you.-elieve me, yours very faithfully,

RSR.

"Dr AADR H. A."





This I at once replied to as follows





"ATIA IRA C,

HITHA.  AC, S..,

19TH DCMR 19.





"M RD, - It is true R. . Stevenson did not refer to Thoreau in 

the passage to which you allude, for the good reason that he could 

not, since he did not now Thoreau till after it was written but 

if you will oblige me and be so good as to turn to p. xix. of 

reface,  A  CRITICISM, to AMIIAR STDIS  M AD S 

you will read



"'pon me this pure, narrow, sunnily-ascetic Thoreau had exercised 

a wondrous charm.  I HA SCARC RITT T STCS SIC I AS 

ITRDCD T HIM, T HIS IC MIHT  SMHR DTCTD  

A CS SRR.'



"It is very detectable in many passages of nature-description and 

of reflection.  I write, my ord, merely that, in case opportunity 

should arise, you might notice this fact.  I am sure R. . 

Stevenson would have lied it recognised. - I remain, my ord, 

always yours faithfully, etc.,



AADR H. A."





In reply to this ord Rosebery sent me only the most formal 

acnowledgment, not in the least encouraging me in any way to 

further aid him in the matter with regard to suggestions of any 

ind so that I was helpless to press on his lordship the need for 

some corrections on other points which I would most willingly have 

tendered to him had he shown himself inclined or ready to receive 

them.



I might also have referred ord Rosebery to the article in TH 

RITISH  (1), "oos that have Influenced Me," where, 

after having spoen of Shaespeare, the ICMT D RA, 

unyan, Montaigne, oethe, Martial, Marcus Aurelius's MDITATIS, 

and ordsworth, he proceeds





"I suppose, when I am done, I shall find that I have forgotten much 

that is influential, as I see already I have forgotten Thoreau."





I need but to add to what has been said already that, had ord 

Rosebery written and told me the result of his references and 

encouraged me to such an exercise, I should by-and-by have been 

very pleased to point out to him that he blundered, proving himself 

no master in urns' literature, precisely as Mr Henley blundered 

about urns' ancestry, when he gives confirmation to the idea that 

urns came of a race of peasants on both sides, and was himself 

nothing but a peasant.



hen the opportunity came to correct such blunders, corrections 

which I had even implored him to mae, ord Rosebery (who by 

several ondon papers had been spoen of as "nowing more than all 

the experts about all his themes"), that is, when his volume was 

being prepared for press, did not act on my good advice given him 

"R, RATIS, R THI" no he contented himself with simply 

slicing out columns from the TIMS, or allowing another man to do 

so for him, and reprinting them ITRATIM T RATIM, all 

imperfect and misleading, as they stood.  SCRITA MAT alas only 

too truly exemplified to his disadvantage.  ut with that note of 

mine in his hand, protesting against an ominous and fatal omission 

as regards the confessed influences that had operated on Stevenson, 

he goes on, or allows Mr eae to go on, quite as though he had 

verified matters and found that I was wrong as regards the facts on 

which I based my appeal to him for recognition of Thoreau as having 

influenced Stevenson in style.  Had he attended to correcting his 

serious errors about Stevenson, and some at least of those about 

urns, thus adding, say, a doen or twenty pages to his boo wholly 

fresh and new and accurate, then the TIMS could not have got, even 

if it had sought, an inunction against his publishers and him and 

there would have been no necessity that he should pad out other and 

later speeches by ust a little whining over what was entirely due 

to his own disregard of good advice, his own neglect - his own 

fault - a neglect and a fault showing determination not to revise 

where revision in ustice to his subect's own free and fran 

acnowledgments made it most essential and necessary.



Mr ustice orth gave his decision against ord Rosebery and his 

publishers, while the ords of Appeal went in his favour but the 

House of ords reaffirmed the decision of Mr ustice orth and 

granted a perpetual inunction against this boo.  The copyright in 

his speech is ord Rosebery's, but the copyright in the TIMS' 

report is the TIMS'.  ou see one of the ideas underlying the law 

is that no manner of speech is quite perfect as the man speas it, 

or is beyond revision, improvement, or extension, and, if there is 

but one RATIM report, as was the case of some of these speeches 

and addresses, then it is incumbent on the author, if he wishes to 

preserve his copyright, to revise and correct his speeches and 

addresses, so as to mae them at least in details so far differ 

from the reported form.  This thing ought ord Rosebery to have 

done, on ethical and literary RDS, not to spea of legal and 

self-interested grounds and I, for one, who from the first held 

exactly the view the House of ords has affirmed, do confess that I 

have no sympathy for ord Rosebery, since he had before him the 

suggestion and the materials for as substantial alterations and 

additions from my own hands, with as much more for other portions 

of his boo, had he informed me of his appreciation, as would have 

saved him and his boo from such a sadly ironical fate as has 

overtaen him and it.



rom the whole business - since "free, gratis, for nothing," I 

offered him as good advice as any lawyer in the three ingdoms 

could have done for large payment, and since he never deemed it 

worth while, even to tell me the results of his reference to 

AMIIAR STDIS, I here and now say deliberately that his conduct 

to me was scarcely so courteous and grateful and graceful as it 

might have been.  How different - very different - the way in which 

the late R. . Stevenson rewarded me for a literary service no whit 

greater or more essentially valuable to him than this service 

rendered to ord Rosebery might have been to him.



This chapter would most probably not have been printed, had not Mr 

Coates re-issued the inadequate and most misleading paragraph about 

Mr Stevenson and style in his ord Rosebery's I AD SCHS 

exactly as it was before, thus perpetuating at once the error and 

the wrong, in spite of all my trouble, warnings, and protests.  It 

is a tragicomedy, if not a farce altogether, considering who are 

the principal actors in it.  And let those who have copies of the 

queer prohibited boo cherish them and than me for that I do by 

this give a new interest and value to it as a curiosity, law-

inhibited, if not as high and conscientious literature - which it 

is not.



I remember very well about the time ord Rosebery spoe on urns, 

and Stevenson, and ondon, that certain ondon papers spoe of his 

deliverances as indicating more nowledge - fuller and exacter 

nowledge - of all these subects than the greatest professed 

experts possessed.  That is their extravagant and most recless 

way, especially if the person spoen about is a "great politician" 

or a man of ran.  They thin they are safe with such superlatives 

applied to a brilliant and clever peer (with large estates and many 

interests), and an ex-rime Minister  ut literature is a 

republic, and it must here be said, though all unwillingly, that 

ord Rosebery is but an amateur - a superficial though a clever 

amateur after all, and their extravagances do not change the fact.  

I declare him an amateur in urns' literature and study because of 

what I have said elsewhere, and there are many points to add to 

that if need were.  I have proved above from his own words that he 

was crassly and unpardonably ignorant of some of the most important 

points in R. . Stevenson's development when he delivered that 

address in dinburgh on Stevenson - a thing very, very pardonable - 

seeing that he is run after to do "speaings" of this sort but to 

go on, in face of such warning and protest, printing his most 

misleading errors is not pardonable, and the legal recorded result 

is my ustification and his condemnation, the more surely that even 

that would not awaen him so far as to cause him to restrain Mr 

Coates from reproducing in his I AD SCHS, ust as it was 

originally, that peccant passage.  I am fully ready to prove also 

that, though Chairman of the ondon County Council for a period, 

and though he made a very clever address at one of Sir . esant's 

lectures, there is much yet - very much - he might learn from Sir 

. esant's writings on ondon.  It isn't so easy to outshine all 

the experts - even for a clever peer who has been rime Minister, 

though it is very, very easy to flatter ord Rosebery, with a 

purpose or purposes, as did at least once also with rarest tact, at 

lasgow, indicating so many other things and possibilities, a 

certain very courtly ex-Moderator of the Church of Scotland.







CHATR I - MR SS AD MS.  TRASR ISAD







MR DMD SS has been so good as to set down, with rather an air 

of too much authority, that both R. . Stevenson and I deceived 

ourselves completely in the matter of my little share in the 

TRASR ISAD business, and that too much credit was sought by me 

or given to me, for the little service I rendered to R. . 

Stevenson, and to the world, say, in helping to secure for it an 

element of pleasure through many generations.  I have not SHT 

any recognition from the world in this matter, and even the mention 

of it became so intolerable to me that I eschewed all writing about 

it, in the face of the most stupid and misleading statements, till 

Mr Sidney Colvin wrote and ased me to set down my account of the 

matter in my own words.  This I did, as it would have been really 

rude to refuse a request so graciously made, and the reader has it 

in the ACADM of 1th March 19.  evertheless, Mr osse's 

statements were revived and quoted, and the thing seemed ever to 

revolve again in a round of controversy.



ow, with regard to the reliability in this matter of Mr dmund 

osse, let me copy here a little note made at request some time 

ago, dealing with two points.  The first is this





1. MST ASSRD I carried away from raemar in my portmanteau, as 

R. . Stevenson says in IDR'S article and in chapter of M IRST 

 reprinted in DIRH DITI, several chapters of TRASR 

ISAD.  n that point R. . Stevenson, myself, and Mr ames 

Henderson, to whom I too these, could not all be wrong and co-

operating to mislead the public.  These chapters, at least vii. or 

viii., as Mr Henderson remembers, would include the IRST THR, 

that is, IA RISD RSIS R RSS.  Mr osse could not 

then HA HARD R. . STS RAD RM THS IA RSIS T 

RM IRST DRAHTS , and I am positively certain that with 

some of the later chapters R. . Stevenson wrote them off-hand, and 

with great ease, and did not revise them to the extent of at all 

needing to re-write them, as I remember he was proud to tell me, 

being then fully in the vein, as he put it, and pleased to credit 

me with a share in this good result, and saying "my enthusiasm over 

it had set him up steep."  There was then, in my idea, a necessity 

that Stevenson should fill up a gap by verbal summary to Mr osse 

(which Mr osse has forgotten), bringing the incident up to a 

further point than Mr osse now thins.  I am certain of my facts 

under this head and as Mr osse clearly fancies he heard R. . 

Stevenson read all from final versions and is mistaen - CMT 

mistaen there - he may be ust as wrong and the victim of error or 

bad memory elsewhere after the lapse of more than twenty years.



2. I gave the pencilled outline of incident and plot to Mr 

Henderson - a fact he distinctly remembers.  This fact completely 

meets and disposes of Mr Robert eighton's quite imaginative I 

'S notion, and is absolute as to R. . Stevenson before he left 

raemar on the 21st September 11, or even before I left it on 

2th August 11, having clear in his mind the whole scheme of the 

wor, though we now very well that the absolute re-writing out 

finally for press of the concluding part of the boo was done at 

Davos.  Mr Henderson has always made it the strictest rule in his 

editorship that the complete outline of the plot and incident of 

the latter part of a story must be supplied to him, if the whole 

story is not submitted to him in MS. and the agreement, if I am 

not much mistaen, was entered into days before R. . Stevenson 

left raemar, and when he came up to ondon some short time after 

to go to eybridge, the only arrangement then needed to be made was 

about the forwarding of proofs to him.



The publication of TRASR ISAD in  S began on the 1st 

ctober 11, o. 55 and ran on in the following order





CTR 1, 11.

TH R



o. 55.



I. The ld Sea Dog at the Admiral enbow.

II. lac Dog Appears and Disappears.



o. 5.



Dated CTR , 11.



III. The lac Spot.



o. 5.



Dated CTR 15, 11.



I. The Sea Chart.

. The ast of the lind Man.

I. The Captain's apers.



o. 5.



Dated CTR 22, 11.



TH STR



I. I go to ristol.

II. The Sea-Coo.

Ill.  owder and Arms.





ow, as the numbers of  S were printed about a fortnight 

in advance of the date they bear under the title, it is clear that 

not only must the contract have been executed days before the 

middle of September, but that a large proportion of the C must 

have been in Mr Henderson's hands at that date too, as he must have 

been entirely satisfied that the story would go on and be finished 

in a definite time.  n no other terms would he have begun the 

publication of it.  He was not in the least liely to have accepted 

a story from a man who, though nown as an essayist, had not yet 

published anything in the way of a long story, on the ground merely 

of three chapters of prologue.  Mr osse left raemar on 5th 

September, when he says nine chapters were written, and Mr 

Henderson had offered terms for the story before the last of these 

could have reached him.  That is on seeing, say six chapters of 

prologue.  ut when Mr osse speas about three chapters only 

written, does he mean three of the prologue or three of the story, 

in addition to prologue, or what does he mean  The facts are 

clear.  I too away in my portmanteau a large portion of the MS., 

together with a very full outline of the rest of the story, so that 

Mr Stevenson was, despite Mr osse's cavillings, SSTATIA 

right when he wrote in M IRST  in the IDR, etc., that "when 

he (Dr app) left us he carried away the manuscript in his 

portmanteau."  There was nothing of the nature of an abandonment of 

the story at any point, nor any difficulty whatever arose in this 

respect in regard to it.







CHATR II - STS RTRAITS







 the portraits of Stevenson a word or two may be said.  There is 

a very good early photograph of him, taen not very long before the 

date of my visit to him at raemar in 11, and is an admirable 

lieness - characteristic not only in expression, but in pose and 

attitude, for it fixes him in a favourite position of his and is, 

at the same time, very easy and natural.  The velvet acet, as I 

have remared, was then his habitual wear, and the thin fingers 

holding the constant cigarette an inseparable associate and 

accompaniment.



He acnowledged himself that he was a difficult subect to paint - 

not at all a good sitter - impatient and apt to rebel at posing and 

time spent in arrangement of details - a fact he has himself, as we 

shall see, set on record in his funny verses to Count erli, who 

painted as successful a portrait as any.  The little miniature, 

full-length, by Mr . S. Sarent, A.R.A., which was painted at 

ournemouth in 15, is confessedly a mere setch and much of a 

caricature  it is in America.  Sir . . Richmond has an 

unfinished portrait, painted in 15 or 1 - it has never passed 

out of the hands of the artist, - a photogravure from it is our 

frontispiece.



There is a medallion done by St auden's, representing Stevenson in 

bed propped up by pillows.  It is thought to be a pretty good 

lieness, and it is now in Mr Sidney Colvin's possession.  thers, 

drawings, etc., are not of much account.



And now we come to the erli portrait, of which so much has been 

written.  Stevenson himself regarded it as the best portrait of him 

ever painted, and certainly it also is characteristic and 

effective, and though not what may be called a pleasant lieness, 

is probably a good representation of him in the later years of his 

life.  Count erli actually undertoo a voyage to Samoa in 192, 

mainly with the idea of painting this portrait.  He and Stevenson 

became great friends, as Stevenson naively tells in the verses we 

have already referred to, but even this did not quite overcome 

Stevenson's restlessness.  He avenged himself by composing these 

verses as he sat





Did ever mortal man hear tell o' sic a ticlin' ferlie

As the comin' on to Apia here o' the painter Mr erli

He cam' and, , for o' human freen's o' a' he was the pearlie -

The pearl o' a' the painter fol was surely Mr erli.

He too a thraw to paint mysel' he painted late and early

 wow the many a yawn I've yawned i' the beard o' Mr erli.

hiles I wad sleep and whiles wad wae, an' whiles was mair than 

surly

I wondered sair as I sat there fornent the eyes o' erli.

 will he paint me the way I want, as bonnie as a girlie

 will he paint me an ugly tye - and be d-d to Mr erli.

ut still an' on whichever it be, he is a canty erlie,

The ord protect the bac an' nec o' honest Mr erli.





Mr Hammerton gives this account of the erli portrait





"The history of the erli portrait is peculiar.  After being 

exhibited for some time in ew ealand it was bought, in the course 

of this year, by a lady who was travelling there, for a hundred 

guineas.  She then offered it for that sum to the Scottish ational 

ortrait allery but the Trustees of the oard of Manufactures - 

that oddly named body to which is entrusted the fostering care of 

Art in Scotland, and, in consequence, the superintendence of the 

ational ortrait allery - did not see their way to accept the 

offer.  Some surprise has been expressed at the action of the 

Trustees in thus declining to avail themselves of the opportunity 

of obtaining the portrait of one of the most distinguished Scotsmen 

of recent times.  It can hardly have been for want of money, for 

though the funds at their disposal for the purchase of ordinary 

wors of art are but limited, no longer ago than last year they 

were the recipients of a very handsome legacy from the late Mr . 

M. ray, the accomplished and much lamented Curator of the Scottish 

ational ortrait allery - a legacy left them for the express 

purpose of acquiring portraits of distinguished Scotsmen, and the 

income of which was amply sufficient to have enabled them to 

purchase this portrait.  ne is therefore almost shut up to the 

conclusion that the Trustees were influenced in their decision by 

one of the two following reasons



"1. That they did not consider Stevenson worthy of a place in the 

gallery.  This is a position so incomprehensible and so utterly 

opposed to public sentiment that one can hardly credit it having 

been the cause of this refusal.  hatever may be the place which 

Stevenson may ultimately tae as an author, and however opinions 

may differ as to the merits of his wor, no one can deny that he 

was one of the most popular writers of his day, and that as a mere 

master of style, if for nothing else, his wors will be read so 

long as there are students of nglish iterature.  Surely the 

portrait of one for whom such a claim may legitimately be made 

cannot be considered altogether unworthy of a place in the ational 

Collection, as one of Scotland's most distinguished sons.



"2. The only other reason which can be suggested as having weighed 

with the Trustees in their decision is one which in some cases 

might be held to be worthy of consideration.  It is conceivable 

that in the case of some men the Trustees might be of opinion that 

there was plenty of time to consider the matter, and that in the 

meantime there was always the chance of some generous donor 

presenting them with a portrait.  ut, as has been shown above, the 

portraits of Stevenson are practically confined to two  one of 

these is in America, and there is not the least chance of its ever 

coming here and the other they have refused.  And, as it is 

understood that the Trustees have a rule that they do not accept 

any portrait which has not been painted from the life, they 

preclude themselves from acquiring a copy of any existing picture 

or even a portrait done from memory.



"It is rumoured that the erli portrait may ultimately find a 

resting-place in the ational Collection of ortraits in ondon.  

If this should prove to be the case, what a commentary on the old 

saying  'A prophet is not without honour save in his own 

country.'"







CHATR III - ASS AD RRRS I CRITICISM







THI could perhaps be more wearisome than to travel o'er the 

wide sandy area of Stevenson criticism and commentary, and expose 

the many and sad and grotesque errors that meet one there.  Mr 

aildon's slip is innocent, compared with many when he says (p. 

1) TRASR ISAD appeared in  S as TH SA-C.  It 

did nothing of the ind it is on plain record in print, even in 

the pages of the DIRH DITI, that Mr ames Henderson would 

not have the title TH SA-C, as he did not lie it, and 

insisted on its being TRASR ISAD.  To him, therefore, the 

vastly better title is due.  Mr Henley was in doubt if Mr Henderson 

was still alive when he wrote the brilliant and elevated article on 

"Some ovels" in the RTH AMRICA, and as a certain dar bird 

illed Coc Robin, so he illed off Dr app, and not to be outdone, 

got in an ideal "Colonel" AC so Mr aildon there follows Henley, 

unaware that Mr Henderson did not lie TH SA-C, and was still 

alive, and that a certain ac in the fatal RTH AMRICA has 

app's credit.



Mr aildon's words are





"This was the famous boo of adventure, TRASR ISAD, appearing 

first as TH SA-C in a boy's paper, where it made no great 

stir.  ut, on its publication in volume form, with the vastly 

better title, the boo at once 'boomed,' as the phrase goes, to an 

extent then, in 12, almost unprecedented.  The secret of its 

immense success may almost be expressed in a phrase by saying that 

it is a boo lie IR'S TRAS, TH IRIM'S RRSS, and 

RIS CRS itself for all ages - boys, men, and women."





hich ust shows how far lapse as to a fact may lead to critical 

misreadings also.



Mr Hammerton sometimes lets good fols say in his pages, without 

correction, what is certainly not correct.  Thus at one place we 

are told that Stevenson was only nown as ouis in print, whereas 

that was the only name by which he was nown in his own family.  

Then Mr osse, at p. 34, is allowed to write





"rofessor lacie was among them on the steamer from the Hebrides, 

a famous figure that calls for no description, and a voluble shaggy 

man, clad in homespun, with spectacles forward upon his nose, who 

it was whispered to us, was Mr Sam ough, the Scottish Academician, 

A ATR-CR AITR  SM RT, who was to die in 1."





Mr Sam ough AS "a water-colour painter of some repute," but a 

painter in oils of yet greater repute - a man of rare strength, 

resource, and facility - never, perhaps, wholly escaping from some 

traces of his early experiences in scene-painting, but a true 

genius in his art.  Ah, well I remember him, though an older man, 

yet youthful in the band of young Scotch artists among whom as a 

youngster I was privileged to move in dinburgh - ettie, Chalmers, 

M'hirter, eter raham, MacTaggart, MacDonald, ohn urr, and 

ough.  ough could be voluble on art and many a tal I had with 

him as with the others named, especially with ohn urr.  ough and 

he both could tal as well as paint, and tal right well.  ough 

had a slight cast in the eye when he got a  excited on his 

subect he would come close to you with head shaing, and 

spectacles displaced, and foreloc wagging, and the cast would seem 

to die away.  as this a fact, or was it an illusion on my part  I 

have often ased myself that question, and now I as it of others.  

Can any of my good friends in dinburgh say can Mr Caw help me 

here, either to confirm or to correct me  I venture to insert here 

an anecdote, with which my friend of old days, Mr m. MacTaggart, 

R.S.A., in a letter indly favours me





"Sam ough was a very sociable man and, when on a setching tour, 

lied to have a young artist or two with him.  ac isbett played 

the violin, and Sam the 'cello, etc.  ac was fond of telling that 

Sam used to let them all choose the best views, and then he would 

tae what was left and ac, with mild astonishment, would say, 

that 'it generally turned out to be the best - on the canvas'"





In Mr Hammerton's copy of the verses in reply to Mr Crocett's 

dedication of TH STICIT MIISTR to Stevenson, in which occurred 

the fine phrase "The grey alloway lands, where about the graves of 

the martyrs the whaups are crying, his heart remembers how"





"lows the wind to-day and the sun and the rain are flying

lows the wind on the moors to-day and now,

here about the graves of the martyrs the whaups are crying,

My heart remembers how.



"rey recumbent tombs of the dead in desert places,

Standing stones on the vacant wine-red moor,

Hills of sheep, and the HMS of the silent vanished races,

And winds austere and pure.



"e it granted me to behold you again in dying,

Hills of home and to hear again the call -

Hear about the graves of the martyrs the pee-weet crying,

And hear no more at all."





Mr Hammerton prints HS instead of HMS, which I have italicised 

above.  And I may note, though it does not affect the poetry, if it 

does a little affect the natural history, that the -TS and 

the whaups are not the same - the one is the curlew, and the other 

is the lapwing - the one most frequenting wild, heathery or peaty 

moorland, and the other pasture or even ploughed land - so that it 

is a great pity for unity and simplicity alie that Stevenson did 

not repeat the "whaup," but wrote rather as though pee-weet or pee-

weets were the same as whaups - the common call of the one is R-

, R-, and of the other -T, -T, hence its common 

name.



It is a pity, too, that Mr Hammerton has no records of some 

portions of the life at Davos lat.  ot only was Stevenson ill 

there in April 192, but his wife collapsed, and the tender concern 

for her made havoc with some details of his literary wor.  It is 

good to now this.  Such errata or omissions throw a finer light on 

his character than controlling perfection would do.  Ah, I remember 

how my old friend . . Rands ("Matthew rowne" and "Henry 

Holbeach") was wont to declare that were men perfect they would be 

isolated, if not idiotic, that we are united to each other by our 

defects - that even physical beauty would be dead lie later ree 

statues, were these not departures from the perfect lines.  The 

letter given by me at p. 2 transfigures in its light, some of his 

wor at that time.



And then what an opportunity, we deeply regret to say, Mr Hammerton 

wholly missed, when he passed over without due explanation or 

commentary that most significant pamphlet - the ADDRSS T TH 

SCTTISH CR.  If Mr Hammerton had but duly and closely studied 

that and its bearings and suggestions in many directions, then he 

would have written such a chapter for true enlightenment and for 

interest as exactly his boo - attractive though it is in much - 

yet specially lacs.  It is to be hoped that Mr Sidney Colvin will 

not once more miss the chance which is thus still left open to him 

to perfect his I  STS, and mae it more interpretive 

than anything yet published.  If he does this, then, a dreadful 

ACA in the DIRH DITI will also be supplied.



Carefully reading over again Mr Arthur Symons' STDIS I T 

ITRATRS - published some years ago - I have come across 

instances of apparent contradiction which, so far as I can see, he 

does not critically altogether reconcile, despite his ingenuity and 

great charm of style.  ne relates to Thoreau, who, while still 

"sturdy" as merson says, "and lie an elm tree," as his sister 

Sophia says, showed exactly the same love of nature and power of 

interpreting her as he did after in his later comparatively short 

period of "invalidity," while Mr Symons says his view of ature 

absolutely was that of the invalid, classing him unqualifiedly with 

efferies and Stevenson, as invalid.  Thoreau's mar even in the 

short later period of "invalidity" was complete and robust 

independence and triumph over it - a thing which I have no doubt 

wholly captivated Stevenson, as scarce anything else would have 

done, as a victory in the exact R he himself was most ambitious 

to fill.  or did not he too wrestle well with the "wolverine" he 

carried on his bac - in this lie Addington Symonds and Alexander 

ope  Surely I cannot be wrong here to reinforce my statement by a 

passage from a letter written by Sophia Thoreau to her good friend 

Daniel Ricetson, after her brother's death, the more that R. . 

Stevenson would have greatly exulted too in its cheery and 

invincible stoicism





"rofound oy mingles with my grief.  I feel as if something very 

beautiful had happened - not death although Henry is with us no 

longer, yet the memory of his sweet and virtuous soul must ever 

cheer and comfort me.  My heart is filled with praise to od for 

the gift of such a brother, and may I never distrust the love and 

wisdom of Him who made him and who has now called him to labour in 

more glorious fields than earth affords.  ou as for some 

particulars relating to Henry's illness.  I feel lie saying that 

Henry was never affected, never reached by it.  I never before saw 

such a manifestation of the power of spirit over matter.  ery 

often I heard him tell his visitors that he enoyed existence as 

well as ever.  The thought of death, he said, did not trouble him.  

His thoughts had entertained him all his life and did still.... He 

considered occupation as necessary for the sic as for those in 

health, and accomplished a vast amount of labour in those last few 

months."





A rare "invalidity" this - a little confusing easy classifications.  

I thin Stevenson would have felt and said that brother and sister 

were well worthy of each other and that the sister was almost as 

grand and cheery a stoic, with no literary profession of it, as was 

the brother.



The other thing relates to Stevenson's HMA S.  I find Mr 

Symons says, at p. 243, that Stevenson "had something a trifle 

elfish and uncanny about him, as of a bewitched being who was not 

actually human - had not actually a human soul" - in which there 

may be a glimmer of truth viewed from his revelation of artistic 

curiosities in some aspects, but is hardly true of him otherwise 

and this Mr Symons himself seems to have felt, when, at p. 24, he 

writes  "He is one of those writers who spea T S  AS TRMS, 

with whom we MA CHA ACTIS."  How "affections" could be 

exchanged on easy terms between the normal human being and an 

elfish creature actually ITHT A HMA S (seeing that 

affections are, as Mr Matthew Arnold might have said, at least, 

three-fourths of soul) is more, I confess, than I can quite see at 

present but in this rather MAADRIT contradiction Mr Symons does 

point at one phase of the problem of Stevenson - this, namely that 

to all the ordinary happy or pleasure-endings he opposes, as it 

were of set purpose, gloom, as though to certain things he was 

quite indifferent, and though, as we have seen, his actual life and 

practice were quite opposed to this.



I am sorry I CAT find the lin in Mr Symons' essay, which would 

quite mae these two statements consistently coincide critically.  

As an enthusiastic, though I hope still a discriminating, 

Stevensonian, I do wish Mr Symons would help us to it somehow 

hereafter.  It would be well worth his doing, in my opinion.







CHATR I - TTRS AD MS I TSTIM







AM many letters received by me in acnowledgment of, or in 

commentary on, my little tributes to R. . Stevenson, in various 

ournals and magaines, I find the following, which I give here for 

reasons purely personal, and because my readers may with me, oin 

in admiration of the fancy, grace and beauty of the poems.  I must 

preface the first poem by a letter, which explains the genesis of 

the poem, and relates a striing and very touching incident





"3 ST DATT'S RAD,

ISHAM HIH RAD, S..,

1ST MARCH 195.



"DAR SIR, - As you have written so much about your friend, the 

late Robert ouis Stevenson, and quoted many tributes to his genius 

from contemporary writers, I tae the liberty of sending you 

herewith some verses of mine which appeared in TH  S of 

ovember last.  I sent a copy of these verses to Samoa, but 

unfortunately the great novelist died before they reached it.  I 

have, however, this wee, received a little note from Mrs Strong, 

which runs as follows



"'our poem of "reeting" came too late.  I can only than you by 

sending a little moss that I pluced from a tree overhanging his 

grave on aea Mountain.'



"I trust you will appreciate my motive in sending you the poem.  I 

do not wish to obtrude my claims as a verse-writer upon your 

notice, but I thought the incident I have recited would be 

interesting to one who is so devoted a collector of Stevensoniana. 

- Respectfully yours,



. . C."





RTI



(T RRT IS STS, I SAMA)



e, pent in cities, prisoned in the mart,

Can now you only as a man apart,

ut ever-present through your matchless art.



ou have exchanged the old, familiar ways

or isles, where, through the range of splendid days,

Her treasure ature lavishly displays.



There, by the gracious sweep of ampler seas,

That swell responsive to the odorous breee.

ou have the wine of ife, and we the lees



ou mar, perchance, within your island bowers,

The slow departure of the languorous hours,

And breathe the sweetness of the strange wild-flowers.



And everything your soul and sense delights -

ut in the solemn wonder of your nights,

hen eace her message on the landscape writes



hen cean scarcely flecs her marge with foam -

our thoughts must sometimes from your island roam,

To centre on the sober face of Home.



Though many a league of water rolls between

The simple beauty of an nglish scene,

rom all these wilder charms your love may wean.



Some indly sprite may bring you as a boon

Sweets from the rose that crowns imperial une,

r reminiscence of the throstle's tune



ea, gladly grant you, with a generous hand,

ar glimpses of the winding, wind-swept strand,

The glens and mountains of your native land,



ntil you hear the pipes upon the breee -

ut wae unto the wild realities

The tangled forests and the boundless seas



or lo the moonless night has passed away,

A sudden dawn dispels the shadows grey,

The glad sea moves and hails the quicening day.



ew life within the arbours of your fief

Awaes the blossom, quivers in the leaf,

And splendour flames upon the coral reef.



If such a prospect stimulate your art,

More than our meadows where the shadows dart,

More than the life which throbs in ondon's heart,



Then stay, encircled by your Southern bowers,

And weave, amid the incense of the flowers,

The sein of fair romance - the gain is ours



. . C.



 S, 11TH ovember 194.







R. . S., I MMRIAM.







A elfin wight as e'er from faeryland

Came to us straight with favour in his eyes,

f wondrous seed that led him to the prie

f fancy, with the magic rod in hand.

Ah, there in faeryland we saw him stand,

As for a while he waled with smiles and sighs,

Amongst us, finding still the gem that buys

Delight and oy at genius's command.



And now thy place is empty  fare thee well

Thou livest still in hearts that owe thee more

Than gold can recon for thy richer store

Is of the good that with us aye most dwell.

arewell sleep sound on aea's windy shrine,

hile round the songsters oin their song to thine.



A. C. R.







ADI







The following appeared some time ago in one of the ondon evening 

papers, and I mae bold, because of its truth and vigour, to insert 

it here





TH AD  STS,



 A ATR'S A





I there be a "and of Stevenson," as there is already a "and of 

urns," or a "and of Scott," nown to the tourist, bescribbled by 

the guide-boo maer  This the future must tell.  et will it be 

easy to mar out the bounds of "Robert ouis Stevenson's Country" 

and, taing his native and well-loved city for a starting-point, a 

stout waler may visit all its principal sites in an afternoon.  

The house where he was born is within a bowshot of the ater of 

eith some five miles to the south are Caeretton and Allermuir, 

and other crests of the entlands, and below them Swanston arm, 

where year after year, in his father's time, he spent the summer 

days basing on the hill slopes two or three miles to the westward 

of Swanston is Colinton, where his mother's father, Dr alfour, was 

minister and here again you are bac to the ater of eith, which 

you can follow down to the ew Town.  In this triangular space 

Stevenson's memories and affections were firmly rooted the fibres 

could not be withdrawn from the soil, and "the voice of the blood" 

and the longing for this little piece of earth mae themselves 

plaintively heard in his last notes.  y othian Road, after which 

Stevenson quaintly thought of naming the new edition of his wors, 

and past oroughmuirhead and the "ore Stane," where ames 

itames set up his standard before lodden, wends your southward 

way to the hills.  The builder of suburban villas has pushed his 

handiwor far into the fields since Stevenson was wont to tramp 

between the city and the entlands and you may loo in vain for 

the flat stone whereon, as the marvelling child was told, there 

once rose a "crow-haunted gibbet."  Three-quarters of an hour of 

easy waling, after you have cleared the last of the houses will 

bring you to Swanston and half an hour more will tae the stiff 

climber, a little breathless, to





TH T  CARTT CRAS.





ou may follow the high road - indeed there is a choice of two, 

drawn at different levels - athwart the western sirts of the raid 

Hills, now tenanted, crown and sides of them, by golf then to the 

crossroads of airmilehead, whence the road dips down, to rise 

again and circumvent the most easterly wing of the entlands.  ou 

would lie to pursue this route, were it only to loo down on ow 

ridge and recall how the last-century gauger used to put together 

his flute and play "ver the hills and far away" as a signal to his 

friend in the distillery below, now converted into a dairy farm, to 

stow away his barrels.  etter it is, however, to climb the stile 

ust past the poor-house gate, and follow the footpath along the 

smoothly scooped bans of the raid urn to "Cocmylane" and to 

Comiston.  The wind has been busy all the morning spreading the 

snow over a glittering world.  The drifts are piled shoulder-high 

in the lane as it approaches Comiston, and each old tree grouped 

around the historic mansion is outlined in snow so virgin pure that 

were the host - "a lady in white, with the most beautiful clear 

shoes on her feet" - to step out through the bac gate, she would 

be invisible, unless, indeed, she were between you and the ivy-

draped dovecot wall.  ear by, at the corner of the Dreghorn oods, 

is the Hunters' Tryst, on the roof of which, when it was still a 

wayside inn, the Devil was wont to dance on windy nights.  In the 

field through which you trudge nee-deep in drift rises the "ay 

Stane," looing to-day lie a tall monolith of whitest marble.  

Stevenson was mistaen when he said that it was from its top a 

neighbouring laird, on pain of losing his lands, had to "wind a 

blast of bugle horn" each time the ing





ISITD HIS RST  TAD.





That honour belongs to another on the adacent farm of ucstane.  

The ancient monument carries you further bac, and there are Celtic 

authorities that translate its name the "Stone of ictory."  The 

"echtland Hills"  - their elder name - were once a refuge for the 

icts and Caeretton - probably Caer-etin, the giant's strong-hold 

- is one of them.  Darly its cliffs frown down upon you, while all 

else is flashing white in the winter sunlight.  or once, in this 

last buttress thrown out into the plain of othian towards the 

royal city, the outer folds of the entlands loses its boldly-

rounded curves, and drops an almost sheer descent of blac roc to 

the little glen below.  In a wrinle of the foothills Swanston farm 

and hamlet are snugly tuced away.  The spirit that breathes about 

it in summer time is gently pastoral.  It is sheltered from the 

rougher blasts it is set about with trees and green hills.  It was 

with this aspect of the place that Stevenson, coming hither on 

holiday, was best acquainted.  The village green, whereon the 

windows of the neat white cottages turn a indly gae under low 

brows of thatch, is then a perfect place in which to rest, and, 

watching the smoe rising and listening to "the leaves ruffling in 

the breee," to muse on men and things especially on Sabbath 

mornings, when the ploughman or shepherd, "perplext wi' leisure," 

it is time to set forth on the three-mile wal along the hill-

sirts to Colinton ir.  ut Swanston in winter time must also





HA  AMIIAR T STS.





Snow-wreathed entlands, the ribbed and furrowed front of 

Caeretton, the low sun striing athwart the sloping fields of 

white, the shadows creeping out from the hills, and the frosty 

yellow fog drawing in from the irth - must often have flashed bac 

on the thoughts of the exile of Samoa.  Against this wintry 

bacground the white farmhouse, old and crow-stepped, loos dingy 

enough the garden is heaped with the fantastic treasures of the 

snow and when you toil heavily up the waterside to the clump of 

pines and beeches you find yourself in a fairy forest.  ne need 

not search to-day for the pool where the lynx-eyed ohn Todd, "the 

oldest herd on the entlands," watched from behind the low scrag of 

wood the stranger collie come furtively to wash away the tell-tale 

stains of lamb's blood.  The effacing hand of the snow has 

smothered it over.  Higher you mount, mid leg-deep in drift, up the 

steep and slippery hill-face, to the summit.  dinburgh has been 

creeping nearer since Stevenson's musing fancy began to draw on the 

memories of the climbs up "steep Caeretton."  ut this light gives 

it a mystic distance and it is all glitter and shadow.  Arthur 

Seat is lie some great sea monster stranded near a city of dreams 

from the fog-swathed irth gleams the white walls of Incheith 

lighthouse, a mar never missed by Stevenson's father's son above 

ife rise the twin breasts of the omonds.  r turn round and loo 

across the s valley to the Moorfoots or more westerly, where the 

bac range of the entlands - Caernethy, the Scald, and the nife-

edged ips - draw a sharp silhouette of Arctic peas against the 

sy.  In the cloven hollow between is lencarse och, an ancient 

chapel and burying ground hidden under its waters on the slope 

above it, not a couple miles away, is Rullion reen, where, as 

Stevenson told in TH TAD RISI (his first printed wor)





TH STAD HIS R SCATTRD





as chaff on the hills.  ere "topmost Allermuir," that rises close 

beside you, removed from his place, we might see the gap in the 

range through which Tom Dalyell and his troopers spurred from 

Currie to the fray.  The air on these heights is invigorating as 

wine but it is also een as a raor.  ithout delaying long yon 

plunge down to the "indy Door ic" follow the "nameless tricle 

that springs from the green bosom of Allermuir," past the roc and 

pool, where, on summer evenings, the poet "loved to sit and mae 

bad verses" and cross Halerside and the Shearers' nowe, those 

"adacent cantons on a single shoulder of a hill," sometimes 

floundering to the nec in the loose snow of a drain, sometimes 

scaring the sheep huddling in the wreaths, or putting up a covey of 

moorfowl that circle bac without a cry to cover in the ling.  In 

an hour you are at Colinton, whose dell has on one side the manse 

garden, where a bright-eyed boy, who was to become famous, spent so 

much of his time when he came thither on visits to his stern 

resbyterian grandfather on the other the old churchyard.  The 

snow has drawn its cloa of ermine over the sleepers, it has run 

its fingers over the worn lettering and records almost effaced 

start out from the stone.  In vain these "voices of generations 

dead" summon their wandering child, though you might deem that his 

spirit would rest more quietly where the cold breee from entland 

shaes the ghostly trees in Colinton Dell than "under the flailing 

fans and shadows of the palm."







ootnotes



(1) rofessor Charles arren Stoddard, rofessor of nglish 

iterature at the Catholic niversity of ashington, in AT 

ID'S ASHIT.



(2) In his portrait-setch of his father, Stevenson speas of him 

as a "man of somewhat antique strain, and with a blended sternness 

and softness that was wholly Scottish, and at first sight somewhat 

bewildering," as melancholy, and with a een sense of his 

unworthiness, yet humorous in company shrewd and childish a 

capital adviser.



(3) IR, Canto .



(4) Alas, I never was told that remar - when I saw my friend 

afterwards there was always too much to tal of else, and I forgot 

to as.



(5) uoted by Hammerton, pp. 2 and 3.



() Tusitala, as the reader must now, is the Samoan for Teller of 

Tales.



() ISDM  TH, p. 3.



() TH RIR AT HM, in MMRIS AD RTRAITS.



(9) A great deal has been made of the "ohn ull element" in De 

uincey since his MMIR was written by me (see MASS'S 

CDSATI, p. 95) so now perhaps a little more may be made of 

the rather conceited Calvinistic Scot element in R. . Stevenson



(1) It was Mr eorge Moore who said this.



(11) RTIHT RI, ctober, 193.









nd 